Comparing the prediction accuracy of 
artificial neural networks and other 
statistical models for breast cancer 
survival 
Harry B. Burke 
Department of Medicine 
New York Medical College 
Valhalla, NY 10595 
David B. Rosen 
Department of Medicine 
New York Medical College 
Valhalla, NY 10595 
Philip H. Goodman 
Department of Medicine 
University of Nevada School of Medicine 
Reno, Nevada 89520 
Abstract 
The TNM staging system has been used since the early 1960's 
to predict breast cancer patient outcome. In an attempt to in- 
crease prognostic accuracy, many putative prognostic factors have 
been identified. Because the TNM stage model can not accom- 
modate these new factors, the proliferation of factors in breast 
cancer has lead to clinical confusion. What is required is a new 
computerized prognostic system that can test putative prognostic 
factors and integrate the predictive factors with the TNM vari- 
ables in order to increase prognostic accuracy. Using the area un- 
der the curve of the receiver operating characteristic, we compare 
the accuracy of the following predictive models in terms of five 
year breast cancer-specific survival: pTNM staging system, princi- 
pal component analysis, classification and regression trees, logistic 
regression, cascade correlation neural network, conjugate gradient 
descent neural, probabilistic neural network, and backpropagation 
neural network. Several statistical models are significantly more ac- 
1064 Harry B. Burke, David B. Rosen, Philip H. Goodman 
curate than the TNM staging system. Logistic regression and the 
backpropagation neural network are the most accurate prediction 
models for predicting five year breast cancer-specific survival 
1 INTRODUCTION 
For over thirty years measuring cancer outcome has been based on the TNM staging 
system (tumor size, number of lymph nodes with metastatic disease, and distant 
metastases) (Beahr et. al., 1992). There are several problems with this model 
(Burke and Henson, 1993). First, it is not very accurate, for breast cancer it is 
44% accurate. Second its accuracy can not be improved because predictive vari- 
ables can not be added to the model. Third, it does not apply to all cancers. In 
this paper we compare computerized prediction models to determine if they can 
improve prognostic accuracy. Artificial neural networks (ANN) are a class of non- 
linear regression and discrimination models. ANNs are being used in many areas 
of medicine, with several hundred articles published in the last year. Representa- 
tive areas of research include anesthesiology (Westenskow et. al., 1992), radiology 
(Tourassi et. al., 1992), cardiology (Leong and Jabri, 1982), psychiatry (Palombo, 
1992), and neurology (Gabor and Seyal, 1992). ANNs are being used in cancer 
research including image processing (Goldberg et. al., 1992) , analysis of labora- 
tory data for breast cancer diagnosis (O Leary et. al., 1992), and the discovery of 
chemotherapeutic agents (Weinstein et. al., 1992). It should be pointed out that 
the analyses in this paper rely upon previously collected prognostic factors. These 
factors were selected for collection because they were significant in a generalized 
linear model such as the linear or logistic models. There is no predictive model that 
can improve upon linear or logistic prediction models when the predictor variables 
meet the assumptions of these models and there are no interactions. Therefore 
he objective of this paper is not to outperform linear or logistic models on these 
data. Rather, our objective is to show that, with variables selected by generalized 
linear models, artificial neural networks can perform as well as the best traditional 
models . There is no a priori reason to believe that future prognostic factors will 
be binary or linear, and that there will not be complex interactions between prog- 
nostic factors. A further objective of this paper is to demonstrate that artificial 
neural networks are likely to outperform the conventional models when there are 
unanticipated nonmonotonic factors or complex interactions. 
2 METHODS 
2.1 DATA 
The Patient Care Evaluation (PCE) data set is collected by the Commission on 
Cancer of the American College of Surgeons (ACS). The ACS, in October 1992, 
requested cancer information from hospital tumor registries in the United States. 
The ACS asked for the first 25 cases of breast cancer seen at that institution in 1983, 
and it asked for follow up information on each of these 25 patients through the date 
of the request. These are only cases of first breast cancer. Follow-up information 
included known deaths. The PCE data set contains, at best, eight year follow-up. 
Prediction Accuracy of Models for Breast Cancer Survival 1065 
We chose to use a five year survival end-point. This analysis is for death due to 
breast cancer, not all cause mortality. 
For this analysis cases with missing data, and cases censored before five years, are 
not included so that the prediction models can be compared without putting any 
prediction model at a disadvantage. We randomly divided the data set into training, 
hold-out, and testing subsets of 3,100, 2,069, and 3,102 cases, respectively. 
2.2 MODELS 
The TMN stage model used in this analysis is the pathologic model (pTNM) based 
on the 1992 American Joint Committee on Cancer's Manual for the Staging of 
Cancer (Beahr et. al., 1992). The pathologic model relies upon pathologically de- 
termined tumor size and lymph nodes, this contrasts with clinical staging which 
relies upon the clinical examination to provide tumor size and lymph node infor- 
mation. To determine the overall accuracy of the TNM stage model we compared 
the model's prediction for each patient, where the individual patient's prediction 
is the fraction of all the patients in that stage who survive, to each patient's true 
outcome. 
Principal components analysis, is a data reduction technique based on the linear 
combinations of predictor variables that minimizes the variance across patients (Jol- 
lie, 1982). The logistic regression analysis is performed in a stepwise manner, with- 
out interaction terms, using the statistical language S-PLUS (S-PLUS, 1992), with 
the continuous variable age modeled with a restricted cubic spline to avoid assuming 
linearity (Harrell et. al., 1988). Two types of Classification and Regression Tree 
(CART) (Breiman et. al., 1984) analyses are performed using S-PLUS. The first 
was a 9-node pruned tree (with 10-fold cross validation on the deviance), and the 
second was a shrunk tree with 13.7 effective nodes. 
The multilayer perceptron neural network training in this paper is based on the 
maximum likelihood function unless otherwise stated, and backpropagation refers 
to gradient descent. Two neural networks that are not multilayer perceptrons are 
tested. They are the Fuzzy ARTMAP neural network (Carpenter et. al., 1991) and 
the probabilistic neural network (Specht, 1990). 
2.3 ACCURACY 
The measure of comparative accuracy is the area under the curve of the receiver 
operating characteristic (Az). Generally, the Az is a nonparametric measure of 
discrimination. Square error summarizes how close each patient's predicted value is 
to its true outcome. The Az measures the relative goodness of the set of predictions 
as a whole by comparing the predicted probability of each patient with that of all 
other patients. The computational approach to the Az that employs the trapezoidal 
approximation to the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for 
binary outcomes was first reported by Bamber (Bamber, 1975), and later in the 
medical literature by Hanley (Hanley and McNeil, 1982). This was extended by 
Harrell (Harrell et. al., 1988) to continuous outcomes. 
1066 Harry B. Burke, David B. Rosen, Philip H. Goodman 
Table 1: PCE 1983 Breast Cancer Data: 5 Year Survival Prediction, 54 Variables. 
PREDICTION MODEL ACCURACY* SPECIFICATIONS 
pTNM Stages .720 
Principal Components Analysis .714 
CART, pruned .753 
CART, shrunk .762 
Stepwise Logistic regression .776 
Fuzzy ARTMAP ANN .738 
Cascade correlation ANN .761 
Conjugate gradient descent ANN .774 
Probabilistic ANN .777 
Backpropagation ANN .784 
0,I,IIA,IIB,IIIA,IIIB,IV 
one scaling iteration 
9 nodes 
13.7 nodes 
with cubic splines 
54-F2a, 128-1 
54-21-1 
54-30-1 
bandwidth = 16s 
54-5-1 
* The area under the curve of the receiver operating characteristic. 
3 RESULTS 
All results are based on the independent variable sample not used for training (i.e., 
the testing data set), and all analyses employ the same testing data set. Using 
the PCE breast cancer data set, we can assess the accuracy of several prediction 
models using the most powerful of the predictor variables available in the data set 
(See Table 1). 
Principal components analysis is not expected to be a very accurate model; with 
one scaling iteration, its accuracy is .714. Two types of classification and regres- 
sion trees (CART), pruned and shrunk, demonstrate accuracies of .753 and .762, 
respectively. Logistic regression with cubic splines for age has an accuracy of .776. 
In addition to the backpropagation neural network and the probabilistic neural net- 
work, three types of neural networks are tested. Fuzzy ARTMAP's accuracy is 
the poorest at .738. It was too computationally intensive to be a practical model. 
Cascade-correlation and conjugate gradient descent have the potential to do as well 
as backpropagation. The PNN accuracy is .777. The PNN has many interesting 
features, but it also has several drawbacks including its storage requirements. The 
backpropagation neural network's accuracy is .784.4. 
4 DISCUSSION 
For predicting five year breast cancer-specific survival, several computerized pre- 
diction models are more accurate than the TNM stage system, and artificial neural 
networks are as good as the best traditional statistical models. 
References 
Bamber D (1975).
