Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround 
Receptive Field 
Shih-Chii Liu and Kwabena Boahen 
Computation and Neural Systems 
139-74 California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
shih@pcmp.caltech.edu, buster@pcmp.caltech.edu 
Abstract 
Both vertebrate and invertebrate retinas are highly eicient in ex- 
tracting contrast independent of the background intensity over five 
or more decades. This eiciency has been rendered possible by 
the adaptation of the DC operating point to the background inten- 
sity while maintaining high gain transient responses. The center- 
surround properties of the retina allows the system to extract in- 
formation at the edges in the image. This silicon retina models the 
adaptation properties of the receptors and the antagonistic center- 
surround properties of the laminar cells of the invertebrate retina 
and the outer-plexiform layer of the vertebrate retina. We also illus- 
trate the spatio-temporal responses of the silicon retina on moving 
bars. The chip has 59x64 pixels on a 6.9x6.8mm  die and it is 
fabricated in 2/rn n-well technology. 
1 Introduction 
It has been observed previously that the initial layers of the vertebrate and inver- 
tebrate retina systems perform very similar processing functions on the incoming 
input signal[I]. The response versus log intensity curves of the receptors in inver- 
tebrate and vertebrate retinas look similar. The curves show that the receptors 
have a larger gain for changes in illumination than to steady illumination, i.e, the 
receptors adapt. This adaptation property allows the receptor to respond over a 
large input range without saturating. 
Anatomically, the eyes of invertebrates differ greatly from that of vertebrates. Ver- 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 679 
tebrates normally have two simple eyes while insects have compound eyes. Each 
compound eye in the fly consists of 3000-4000 ommatidia and each ommatidium 
consists of 8 photoreceptors. Six of these receptors (which are also called R1-R6) 
are in a single spectral class. The other two receptors, R7 and R8 provide channels 
for wavelength discrimination and polarization. 
The vertebrate eye is divided into the outer-plexiform layer and the inner-plexiform 
layer. The outer-plexiform layer consists of the rods and cones, horizontal cells 
and bipolar cells. Invertebrate receptors depolarise in response to an increase in 
light, in contrast to vertebrate receptors, which hyperpolarise to an increase in light 
intensity. Both vertebrate and invertebrate receptors show light oxtaptation over at 
least five decoxtes of background illumination. This oxtaptation property allows the 
retina to maintain a high transient gain to contrast over a wide range of background 
intensities. 
The invertebrate receptors project to the next layer which is called the lamina layer. 
This layer consists primarily of monopolar cells which show a similar response ver- 
sus log intensity curve to that of vertebrate bipolar cells in the outer-plexiform 
layer. Both cells respond with graded potentials to changes in illumination. These 
cells also show a high transient gain to changes in illumination while ignoring the 
background intensity and they possess center-surround receptive fields. In verte- 
brates, the cones which are excited by the incoming light, activate the horizontal 
cells which in turn inhibit the cones. The horizontal cells thus mediate the lateral 
inhibition which produces the center-surround properties. In insects, a possible 
process of this lateral inhibition is done by current flow from the photoreceptors 
through the epithelial glial cells surrounding an ommatidium or the modulation 
of the local field potential in the lamina to influence the transmembrane potential 
of the photoreceptor[2]. The center-surround receptive fields allow contrasts to be 
accentuated since the surround computes a local mean and subtracts that from the 
center signal. 
Mahowald[3] previously described a silicon retina with adaptive photoreceptors and 
Boahen et al.[4] recently described a compact current-mode analog model of the 
outer-plexiform layer of the vertebrate retina and analysed the spario-temporal 
processing properties of this retina[5]. A recent array of photoreceptors from 
Delbriick[6] uses an adaptive photoreceptor circuit that adapts its operating point 
to the background intensity so that the pixel shows a high transient gain over 5 
decoxtes of background illumination. However this retina does not have spatial 
coupling between pixels. 
The pixels in the silicon retina described here has a compact circuit that incor- 
porates both spatial and temporal filtering with light oxtaptation over 5 decoxtes 
of background intensity. The network exhibits center-surround behavior. Boahen 
et al.[4] in their current-mode diffusor retina, draw an analogy between parts of 
the diffusor circuit and the different cells in the outer-plexiform layer. While the 
same analogy cannot be drawn from this silicon retina to the invertebrate retina 
since the function of the cells are not completely understood, the output responses 
of the retina circuit are similar to the output responses of the photoreceptor and 
monopolar cells in invertebrates. 
The circuit details are described in Section 2 and the spario-temporal processing 
performed by the retina on stimulus moving at different speeds is shown in Section 
680 S.-C. LIU, K. BOAHEN 
2 Circuit 
(a) 
iin-1, 
gmlYe!.l  fcr 
Vr+ 1 rrr 
gmlVd+(l Cr 
Figure 1: (a) One-dimensional version of the retina. (b) Small-signal equivalent of 
circuit in (a). 
A one-dimensional version of the retina is shown in Figure l(a). The retina consists 
of an adaptive photoreceptor circuit at each pixel coupled together with diffusors, 
controlled by voltages, Vg and Va. The output of this network can either be obtained 
at the voltage output, 14 or at the current output, Io but the outputs have different 
properties. Phototransduction is obtained by using a reverse-biased photodiode 
which produces current that is proportional to the incident light. The logarithmic 
properties are obtained by operating the feedback transistor shown in Figure l(a) 
in the subthreshold region. The voltage change at the output photoreceptor, vr, is 
proportional to a small contrast since 
vr = UTd(logi)- UT dI _ UT i 
n n I tClbg 
co, Coz is the oxide capacitance and 
where U- is the thermal voltage, n = Co,+Cd , 
Ca is the depletion capacitance of a transistor. The circuit works as follows: If 
the photocurrent through the photodiode increases, Vr will be pulled low and the 
output voltage at 14 increases by vt = Avr where A is the amplifier gain of the 
output stage. This output change in Vt is coupled into Vet through a capacitor 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 681 
divider ratio, c2 The feedback transistor, M4, operates in the subthreshold 
C +C2 ' 
region and supplies the current necessary to offset the photocurrent. The increase 
in Vcl (i.e. the gate voltage of M4) causes the current supplied by M3 to increase 
which pulls the node voltage, Vr, back to the voltage level needed by M1 to sink 
the bias current from transistor, M2. 
3.5 
3.45 
3.4 
3.3 
3.25 
-1 
3.2 I I I I 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
Time (Sec) 
Figure 2: This figure shows the output response of the receptor to a variation of 
about 40% p-p in the intensity of a flickering LED light incident on the chip. The 
response shows that the high sensitivity of the receptor to the LED is maintained 
over 5 decades of differing background intensities. The numbers on the section of 
the curve indicate the log intensity of the mean value. 0 log is the absolute intensity 
from the LED. 
The adaptive element, M3, has an I-V curve which looks like a hyperbolic sine. 
The small slope of the I-V curve in the middle means that for small changes of 
voltages across M3, the element looks like an open-circuit. With large changes of 
voltage across M3, the current through M3 becomes exponential and Vcl is charged 
or discharged almost instantaneously. 
Figure 2 shows the output response of the photoreceptor to a square-wave variation 
of about 40% p-p in the intensity of a red LED (635 nm). The results show that 
the circuit is able to discern the small contrast over five decades of background in- 
tensity while the steady-state voltage of the photoreceptor output varies only about 
15reV. Further details of the photoreceptor circuit and its adaptation properties 
are described in Delbr/ick[6]. 
3 Spario-Temporal Response 
The spario-temporal response of the network to different moving stimuli is explored 
in this section. The circuit shown in Figure l(a) can be transferred to an equivalent 
network of resistors and capacitors as shown in Figure l(b) to obtain the transfer 
function of the circuit. The capacitors at each node are necessary to model the 
682 S.-C. LIU, K. BOAHEN 
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1 
(a) Time (sec) 
O 4.81 
'4.6 
O 4.4 
='42 
4 
3.8 
0.:5 
0.4 0.5 0,6 0 7 0 8 
(b) Time (Sec) 
Figure 3: (a) Response of a pixel to a grey strip 2 pixels wide of gray-level 0.4 
on a dark background of level 0 moving past the pixel at different speeds. (b) 
Response of a pixel to a dark strip of gray-level 0.6 on a white background of level 
1 moving past the pixel at different speeds. The voltage shown on these curves is 
not the direct measurement of the voltage at  but rather  drives a current-sensing 
transistor and this current is then sensed by an offchip current sense-amplifier. 
Adaptive Retina with Center-Surround Receptive Field 683 
temporal responses of the circuit. 
The chip results from the experiments below illustrate the center-surround proper- 
ties of the network and the difference in time-constants between the surround and 
center. 
3.1 Chip Results 
Data from the 2D chip is shown in the next few figures. In these experiments, we 
are only looking at one pixel of the 2D array.
