103 
NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TEMPLATE MATCHING: 
APPLICATION TO REAL-TIME CLASSIFICATION 
OF THE ACTION POTENTIALS OF REAL NEURONS 
Yiu-fai Wong, Jashojiban Banik]. and James M. Bower$ 
]'Division of Engineering and Applied Science 
$Division of Biology 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
ABSTRACT 
Much experimental study of real neural networks relies on the proper classification of 
extracellulary sampled neural signals (i.e. action potentials) recorded from the brains of ex- 
perimental animals. In most neurophysiology laboratories this classification task is simplified 
by limiting investigations to single, electrically well-isolated neurons recorded one at a time. 
However, for those interested in sampling the activities of many single neurons simultaneously, 
waveform classification becomes a serious concern. In this paper we describe and constrast 
three approaches to this problem each designed not only to recognize isolated neural events, 
but also to separately classify temporally overlapping events in real time. First we present two 
formulations of waveform classification using a neural network template matching approach. 
These two formulations are then compared to a simple template matching implementation. 
Analysis with real neural signals reveals that simple template matching is a better solution to 
this problem than either neural network approach. 
INTRODUCTION 
For many years, neurobiologists have been studying the nervous system by 
using single electrodes to serially sample the electrical activity of single neu- 
rons in the brain. However, as physiologists and theorists have become more 
aware of the complex, nonlinear dynamics of these networks, it has become 
apparent that serial sampling strategies may not provide all the information 
necessary to understand functional organization. In addition, it will likely be 
necessary to develop new techniques which sample the activities of multiple 
neurons simultaneously 1. Over the last several years, we have developed two 
different methods to acquire multineuron data. Our initial design involved 
the placement of many tiny microelectrodes individually in a tightly packed 
pseudo-floating configuration within the brain 2. More recently we have been 
developing a more sophisticated approach which utilizes recent advances in 
silicon technology to fabricate multi-ported silicon based electrodes (Fig. 1). 
Using these electrodes we expect to be able to readily record the activity pat- 
terns of larger number of neurons. 
As research in multi-single neuron recording techniques continue, it has be- 
come very clear that whatever technique is used to acquire neural signals from 
many brain locations, the technical difficulties associated with sampling, data 
compressing, storing, analyzing and interpreting these signals largely dwarf the 
development of the sampling device itself. In this report we specifically consider 
the need to assure that neural action potentials (also known as spikes) on 
each of many parallel recording channels are correctly classified, which is just 
one aspect of the problem of post-processing multi-single neuron data. With 
more traditional single electrode/single neuron recordings, this task usually in- 
American Institute of Physics 1988 
104 
volves passing analog signals through a Schmidt trigger whose output indicates 
the occurence of an event to a computer, at the same time as it triggers an 
oscilloscope sweep of the analog data. The experimenter visually monitors the 
oscilloscope to verify the accuracy of the discrimination as a well-discriminated 
signal from a single neuron will overlap on successive oscilloscope traces (Fig. 
lc). Obviously this approach is impractical when large numbers of channels 
are recorded at the same time. Instead, it is necessary to automate this classifi- 
cation procedure. In this paper we will describe and contrast three approaches 
we have developed to do this. 
layer 
Traces 
on lower 
layer 
., ,, ; 
0 1 
2 3 4 
me (mc) 
Receding site b. 
75 sq 
Fig. 1. Silicon probe being developed in our lababoratory for multi-single unit recording 
in cerebellax cortex. a) a complete probe; b) surface view of one recording tip; c) several 
superhnposed neuronal action potentials recorded from such a silicon electrode in cerebellax 
cortex. 
While our principal design objective is the assurance that neural waveforms 
are adequately discriminated on multiple channels, technically the overall ob- 
jective of this research project is to sample from as many single neurons as 
possible. Therefore, it is a natural extention of our effort to develop a neural 
waveform classification scheme robust enough to allow us to distinguish activi- 
ties arising from more than one neuron per recording site. To do this, however, 
we now not only have to determine that a particular signal is neural in origin, 
but also from which of several possible neurons it arose (see Fig. 2a). While 
in general signals from different neurons have different waveforms aiding in 
the classification, neurons recorded on the same channel firing simultaneously 
or nearly simultaneously will produce novel combination waveforms (Fig. 2b) 
which also need to be classified. It is this last complication which particularly 
105 
bedevils previous efforts to classify neural signals (For review see 5, also see 
3-4). In summary, then, our objective was to design a circuit that would: 
1. distinguish different waveforms even though neuronal discharges tend 
to be quite similar in shape (Fig. 2a); 
2. recognize the same waveform even though unavoidable movements 
such as animal respiration often result in periodic changes in the amplitude 
of a recorded signal by moving the brain relative to the tip of the electrode; 
3. be considerably robust to recording noise which variably corrupts all 
neural recordings (Fig. 2); 
4. resolve overlapping waveforms, which are likely to be particularly in- 
teresting events from a neurobiological point of view; 
5. provide real-time performance allowing the experimenter to detect 
problems with discrimination and monitor the progress of the experiment; 
6. be implementable in hardware due to the need to classify neural sig- 
nals on many channels simultaneously. Simply duplicating a software-based 
algorithm for each channel will not work, but rather, multiple, small, in- 
dependent, and programmable hardware devices need to be constructed. 
1 1 
signal recorded 
2 2 
t 5o v 
electrode 
a. 
Fig. 2. a) Schematic diagram of an electrode recording from two neuronal cell bodies b) An 
actual multi-neuron recording. Note the similarities in the two waveforms and the overlapping 
event. c) and d) Synthesized data with different noise levels for testing classification algorithms 
(c: 0.3 NSR; d: 1.1 NSR). 
106 
METHODS 
The problem of detecting and classifying multiple neural signals on sin- 
gle voltage records involves two steps. First, the waveforms that are present 
in a particular signal must be identified and the templates be generated; 
second, these waveforms must be detected and classified in ongoing data 
records. To accomplish the first step we have modified the principal com- 
ponent analysis procedure described by Abeles and Goldstein 3 to automat- 
ically extract templates of the distinct waveforms found in an initial sam- 
ple of the digitized analog data. This will not be discussed further as it is 
the means of accomplishing the second step which concerns us here. Specif- 
ically, in this paper we compare three new approaches to ongoing wave- 
form classification which deal explicitly with overlapping spikes and vari- 
ably meet other design criteria outlined above. These approaches consist of 
a modified template matching scheme, and two applied neural network im- 
plementations. We will first consider the neural network approaches. On 
a point of nomenclature, to avoid confusion in what follows, the real neu- 
rons whose signals we want to classify will be referred to as neurons while 
computing elements in the applied neural networks will be called Hopons. 
Neural Network Approach -- Overall, the problem of classifying neural 
waveforms can best be seen as an optimization problem in the presence of 
noise. Much recent work on neural-type network algorithms has demonstrated 
that these networks work quite well on problems of this sort 6-8. In particular, 
in a recent paper Hopfield and Tank describe an A/D converter network and 
suggest how to map the problem of template matching into a similar context 8. 
The energy functional for the network they propose has the form: 
where T/j = connectivity between Hopon i and Hopon j, V/ = voltage output 
of Hopon i, Ii = input current to Hopon i and each Hopon has a sigmoid 
input-output characteristic V -- g(u) = 1/(1 + exp(-au)). 
If the equation of motion is set to be: 
dui/dt = -OE/OV =  TsV  + I 
(la) 
then we see that dE/dt = -(j TiVj + Ii)dV/dt - -(du/dt)(dV/dt) = 
-g'(u)(du/dt) 2 50. Hence E will go to to a minimum which, in a network 
constructed as described below, will correspond to a proposed solution to a 
particular waveform classification problem. 
Template Matching using a Hopfield-type Neural Net -- We have 
taken the following approach to template matching using a neural network. For 
simplicity, we initially restricted the classification problem to one involving two 
waveforms and have accordingly constructed a neural network made up of two 
groups of Hopons, each concerned with discriminating one or the other wave- 
form. The classification procedure works as follows: first, a Schmidt trigger 
107 
is used to detect the presence of a voltage on the signal channel above a set 
threshold. When this threshold is crossed, implying the presence of a possible 
neural signal, 2 msecs of data around the crossing are stored in a buffer (40 
samples at 20 KHz). Note that biophysical limitations assure that a s
