249 
HIERARCHICAL LEARNING CONTROL - 
AN APPROACH WITH NEURON-LIKE ASSOCIATIVE MEMORIES 
E. Ers 
ISRA Systemtechnik GmbH, Sch6fferstr. 15, D-6100 Darmstadt, FRG 
H. Tolle 
TH Darmstadt, Institut fgr Regelungstechnik, 
Schlograben 1, D-6100 Darmstadt, FRG 
ABSTRACT 
Advances in brain theory need two complementary approaches: 
Analytical investigations by in situ measurements and as well syn- 
thetic modelling supported by computer simulations to generate 
suggestive hypothesis on purposeful structures in the neural 
tissue. In this paper research of the second line is described: 
Starting from a neurophysiologically inspired model of stimulus- 
response (S-R) and/or associative memorization and a psychological- 
ly motivated ministructure for basic control tasks, pre-conditions 
and conditions are studied for cooperation of such units in a 
hierarchical organisation, as can be assumed to be the general 
layout of macrostructures in the brain. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Theoretic modelling in brain theory is a highly speculative 
subject. However, it is necessary since it seems very unlikely to 
get a clear picture of this very complicated device by just analy- 
zing the available measurements on sound and/or damaged brain parts 
only. As in general physics, one has to realize, that there are 
different levels of modelling: in physics stretching from the ato- 
mary level over atom assemblies till up to general behavioural 
models like kinematics and mechanics, in brain theory stretching 
from chemical reactions over electrical spikes and neuronal cell 
assembly cooperation till general human behaviour. 
The research discussed in this paper is located just above the 
direct study of synaptic cooperation of neuronal cell assemblies as 
studied e.g. in /Amari 1988/. It takes into account the changes of 
synaptic weighting, without simulating the physical details of such 
changes, and makes use of a general imitation of learning situation 
(stimuli) - response connections for building up trainable basic 
control loops, which allow dynamic S-R memorization and which are 
themselves elements of some more complex behavioural loops. The 
general aim of this work is to make first steps in studying struc- 
tures, preconditions and conditions for building up purposeful 
hierarchies and by this to generate hypothesis on reasons and 
American Institute of Physics 1988 
250 
meaning behind substructures in the brain like the columnar organi- 
zation of the cerebral cortex (compare e.g. /Mountcastle 1978/). 
The paper is organized as follows: In Chapter II a short descrip- 
tion is given of the basic elements for building up hierarchies, 
the learning control loop LERNAS and on the role of its subelement 
AMS, some ssociative memory system inspired by neuronal network 
considerations. Chapter III starts from certain remarks on sub- 
structures in the brain and discusses the cooperation of LERNAS- 
elements in hierarchies as possible imitations of substructures. 
Chapter IV specifies the steps taken in this paper in the direction 
of Chapter III and Chapter V presents the results achieved by com- 
puter simulations. Finally an outlook will be given on further 
investigations. 
II. LERNAS AND AMS 
Since the formal neuron was introduced by /McCulloch and Pitts 
1943/, various kinds of neural network models have been proposed, 
such as the perceptron by /Rosenblatt 1957/ the neuron equation of 
/Calanclio 1961/, the cerebellar model articulation controller CMAC 
by /Albus 1972, 1975/ or the associative memory models by 
/Fukushima 1973/, /Kohonen 1977/ and /Amari 1977/. However, the 
ability of such systems to store information efficiently and to 
perform certain pattern recognition jobs is not adequate for sur- 
vival of living creatures. So they can be only substructures in the 
overall brain organization; one may call them a microstructure. 
Purposeful acting means a goal driven coordination of sensory in- 
formation and motor actions. Although the human brain is a very 
complex far end solution of evolution, the authors speculated in 
1978 that it might be a hierarchical combination of basic elements, 
which would perform in an elementary way like the human brain in 
total, especially since there is a high similarity in the basic 
needs as well as in the neuronal tissue of human beings and rela- 
tively simple creatures. This led to the design of the learning 
control loop LERNAS in 1981 by one of the authors - /Ersfi 1984/ - 
on the basis of psychological findings. He transformed the state- 
ment of /Piaget 1970/, that the complete intelligent action needs 
three elements: 1) the question, which directs possible search 
actions, 2) the hypothesis, which anticipates eventual solutions, 
3) the control, which selects the solution to be chosen into the 
structure shown in Fig. 1, by identifying the question with an 
performance criterion for assessment of possible advantages/disad- 
vantages of certain actions, the hypothesis with a predictive 
model of environment answers and the control with a control stra- 
tegy which selects for known situations the best action, for un- 
known situations some explorative action (active learning). 
In detail, Fig. 1 has to be understood in the following way: The 
predictive model is built up in a step by step procedure from a 
characterization of the actual situation at the time instant k-T 
s 
251 
T sampling time) and the measured response of the unknown en- 
s 
vironment at time instant (k+l)T s. The actual situation consists of 
measurements regarding the stimuli and responses of the environment 
at time instant k.T plus - as far as necessary for a unique char- 
s 
acterization - of the situation-stimuli and responses at time in- 
stants (k-1)T s, (k-2)Ts..., provided by the short term memory. To 
reduce learning effort, the associative memory system used to store 
the predictive model has the ability of local generalization, that 
means making use of the trained response value not only for the 
corresponding actual situation, but also in similar situations. The 
assessment module generates on the basis of a given goal - a wanted 
environment response - with an adequate performance criterion an 
evaluation of possible actions through testing them with the pre- 
dictive model, as far as this is already built up and gives mean- 
ingful answers. The result is stored in the control strategyAMS 
together with its quality: real optimal action for the actual situ- 
ation or only relatively optimal action, if the testing reached the 
border of the known area in the predictive model of the environ- 
ment. In the second case, the real action is changed in a sense of 
curiosity, so that by the action the known area of the predictive 
model is extended. By this, one reaches more and more the first 
case, in which the real optimal actions are known. Since the first 
guess for a good action in the optimization phase is given to the 
assessment module from the control strategy AMS - not indicated in 
Fig. 1 to avoid unnecessary complication - finally the planning 
level gets superfluous and one gets very quick optimal reactions, 
the checking with the planning level being necessary and helpful 
only to find out, whether the environment has not changed, possi- 
bly. Again the associative memory system used for the control stra- 
tegy is locally generalizing to reduce the necessary training 
effort. 
The AMS storage elements for the predictive model, and for opti- 
mized actions are a refinement and implementation for on-line 
application of the neuronal network model CMAC from J. Albus - see 
e.g. /Ers6, Militzer 1982/ -, but it could be any other locally 
generalizing neural network model and even a storage element based 
on pure mathematical considerations, as has been shown in 
/Militzer, Tolle 1986/. 
The important property to build up an excellent capability to 
handle different tasks in an environment known only by some sensory 
information - the property which qualifies LERNAS as a possible 
basic structure (a ministructure) in the nervous system of living 
creatures - has been proven by its application to the control of a 
number of technical processes, starting with empty memories for the 
predictive model and the control strategy storage. Details on this 
as well as on the mathematical equations describing LERNAS can be 
found in /Ers6, Mao 1983/, /Ers6, Tolle 1984/ and /Ers6, Militzer 
1984/. 
252 
It should be mentioned that the concept of an explicit predictive 
environmental model - as used in bERNAS - is neither the only mean- 
ingful description of human job handling nor a necessary part of 
our basic learning element. It suffices to use a prediction whether 
a certain action is advantegeous to reach the actual goal or 
whether this is not the case. More information on such a basic 
element MINLERNAS, which may be used instead of LERNAS in general 
(however, with the penalty of some performance degradation) are 
given in /Erst, Tolle 1988/. 
III. HIERARCHIES 
There are a number of reasons to believe, that the brain is 
built up as a hierarchy of control loops, the higher levels having 
more and more coordinative functions. A very simple example shows 
the necessity in certain cases. The legs of a jumping jack can move 
together, only. If one wants to move them separately, one has to 
cut the connection, has to build up a separate controller for each 
leg and a coordinating controller in a hierarchically higher level 
to restore the possibility of coordinated movements. Actually, one 
can find such an evolution in the historical development of certain 
animals. In a more complex sense a multilevel hierarchy exists in 
the extrapyramidal motor system. Fig. 2 from /Albus 1979/ specifies 
five levels of hierarchy for motor control. It can be speculated, 
that hierarchical organizations are not existing in the senso-moto- 
ric level only, but also in the levels of general abstractions and
