Learning to Predict 
Visibility and Invisibility 
from Occlusion Events 
Jonathan A. Marshall Richard K. Alley 
Robert S. Hubbard 
Department of Computer Science, CB 3175, Sitterson Hall 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, U.S.A. 
marshall@cs.unc.edu, 919-962-1887, fax 919-962-1799 
Abstract 
Visual occlusion events constitute a major source of depth information. 
This paper presents a self-organizing neural network that learns to detect, 
represent, and predict the visibility and invisibility relationships that arise 
during occlusion events, after a period of exposure to motion sequences 
containing occlusion and disocclusion events. The network develops two 
parallel opponent channels or chains of lateral excitatory connections 
for every resolvable motion trajectory. One channel, the On chain or 
visible chain, is activated when a moving stimulus is visible. The other 
channel, the Off chain or invisible chain, carries a persistent, amodal 
representation that predicts the motion of a formerly visible stimulus that 
becomes invisible due to occlusion. The learning rule uses disinhibition 
from the On chain to trigger learning in the Off chain. The On and 
Off chain neurons can learn separate associations with object depth or- 
dering. The results are closely related to the recent discovery (Assad & 
Maunsell, 1995) of neurons in macaque monkey posterior parietal cortex 
that respond selectively to inferred motion of invisible stimuli. 
1 INTRODUCTION: LEARNING ABOUT OCCLUSION 
EVENTS 
Visual occlusion events constitute a major source of depth information. Yet lit- 
tle is known about the neural mechanisms by which visual systems use occlusion 
events to infer the depth relations among visual objects. What is the structure of 
such mechanisms? Some possible answers to this question are revealed through an 
analysis of learning rules that can cause such mechanisms to self-organize. 
Evidence from psychophysics (Kaplan, 1969; Nakayama & Shimojo, 1992; 
Nakayama, Shimojo, & Silverman, 1989; Shimojo, Silverman, & Nakayama, 
1988, 1989; Yonas, Craton, & Thompson, 1987) and neurophysiology (Assad & 
Maunsell, 1995; Frost, 1993) suggests that the process of determining relative 
depth from occlusion events operates at an early stage of visual processing. Mar- 
shall (1991) describes evidence that suggests that the same early processing mech- 
anisms maintain a representation of temporarily occluded objects for some amount 
Learning to Predict Visibility and Invisibility from Occlusion Events 817 
of time after they have disappeared behind an occluder, and that these represen- 
tations of invisible objects interact with other object representations, in much the 
same manner as do representations of visible objects. The evidence includes the 
phenomena of kinetic subjective contours (Kellman & Cohen, 1984), motion viewed 
through a slit (Parks' Camel) (Parks, 1965), illusory occlusion (Ramachandran, In- 
ada, & Kiama, 1986), and interocular occlusion sequencing (Shimojo, Silverman, & 
Nakayama, 1988). 
2 PERCEPTION OF OCCLUSION AND 
DISOCCLUSION EVENTS: AN ANALYSIS 
The neural network model exploits the visual changes that occur at occlusion bound- 
aries to form a mechanism for detecting and representing object visibility/invisibility 
information. The set of learning rules used in this model is an extended version of 
one that has been used before to describe the formation of neural mechanisms for 
a variety of other visual processing functions (Hubbard & Marshall, 1994; Mar- 
shall, 1989, 1990ac, 1991, 1992; Martin & Marshall, 1993). 
Our analysis is derived from the following visual predictivity principle, which 
may be postulated as a fundamental principle of neural organization in visual sys- 
tems: Visual systems represent the world in terms of predictions of its appearance, 
and they reorganize themselves to generate better predictions. To maximize the cor- 
rectness and completeness of its predictions, a visual system would need to predict 
the motions and visibility/invisibility of all objects in a scene. Among other things, 
it would need to predict the disappearance of an object moving behind an occluder 
and the reappearance of an object emerging from behind an occluder. 
A consequence of this postulate is that occluded objects must, at some level, 
continue to be represented even though they are invisible. Moreover, the repre- 
sentation of an object must distinguish whether the object is visible or invisible; 
otherwise, the visual system could not determine whether its representations predict 
visibility or invisibility, which would contravene the predictivity principle. Thus, 
simple single-channel prediction schemes like the one described by Marshall (1989, 
1990a) are inadequate to represent occlusion and disocclusion events. 
3 A MODEL FOR GROUNDED LEARNING TO 
PREDICT VISIBILITY AND INVISIBILITY 
The initial structure of the Visible/Invisible network model is given in Figure 1A. 
The network self-organizes in response to a training regime containing many input 
sequences representing motion with and without occlusion and disocclusion events. 
After a period of self-organization, the specific connections that a neuron receives 
(Figure lB) determine whether it responds to visible or invisible objects. A neuron 
that responds to visible objects would have strong bottom-up input connections, 
and it would also have strong time-delayed lateral excitatory input connections. A 
neuron that responds selectively to invisible objects would not have strong bottom- 
up connections, but it would have strong lateral excitatory input connections. These 
lateral inputs would transmit to the neuron evidence that a previously visible object 
existed. The neurons that respond to invisible objects must operate in a way that 
allows lateral input excitation alone to activate the neurons supraliminally, in the 
absence of bottom-up input excitation from actual visible objects. 
4 SIMULATION OF A SIMPLIFIED NETWORK 
4.1 INITIAL NETWORK STRUCTURE 
The simulated network, shown in Figure 2, describes a simplified one- 
dimensional subnetwork (Marshall & Alley, 1993) of the more general two- 
dimensional network. Layer i is restricted to a set of motion-sensitive neurons 
corresponding to one rightward motion trajectory. 
The L+ connections in the simulation have a signal transmission latency of 
one time unit. Restricting the lateral connections to a single time delay and to a 
single direction limits the simulation to representing a single speed and direction of 
motion; these results are therefore preliminary. This restriction reduced the number 
of connections and made the simulation much faster. 
818 J.A. MARSHALL, R. K. ALLEY, R. S. HUBBARD 
(A) (B) 
Figure 1: Model of a self-organized occlusion-event detector network. (A) Network is initially 
organized nonspecifically, so that each neuron receives roughly homogeneous input connections: 
feedforward, bottom-up excitatory ( B+ ) connections from a preprocessing stage of motion-tuned 
neurons (bottom-up solid arrows), lateral inhibitory (L-) connections (dotted arrows), and time- 
delayed lateral excitatory (L+) connections (lateral solid arrows). (B) After exposure during 
a developmental period to many motion sequences containing occlusion and disocclusion events, 
the network learns a highly specific connection structure. The previously homogeneous network 
bifurcates into two parallel opponent channels for every resolvable motion trajectory: some neurons 
keep their bottom-up connections and others lose them. The channels for one trajectory are shown. 
Neurons from the two opponent channels are strongly linked by lateral inhibitory connections 
(dotted arrows). Time-delayed lateral excitatory connections cause stimulus information (priming 
excitation, or prediction signals) to propagate along the channels. 
Layer 1 
Figure 2: Simulation results. (Left) Simulated network structure before training. Neurons are 
wired homogeneously from the input layer. (Right) After training, some of the neurons lose their 
bottom-up input connections. 
4.2 USING DISINHIBITION TO CONTROL THE LEARNING OF 
OCCLUSION RELATIONS 
This paper describes one method for learning occlusion relations. Other 
methods may also work. The method involves extending the EXIN (excita- 
tory+inhibitory) learning scheme described by Marshall (1992, 1995). The EXIN 
scheme uses a variant of a Hebb rule to govern learning in the bottom-up and time- 
delayed lateral excitatory connections, plus an anti-Hebb rule to govern learning in 
the lateral inhibitory connections. 
The EXIN system was extended by letting inhibitory connections exert a disin- 
hibitory effect under certain regulated conditions. The disinhibition rule was chosen 
because it constitutes a simple way that the unexpected failure of a neuron to be- 
come activated (e.g., when an object disappears behind an occluder) can cause some 
other neuron to become activated. That other neuron can then learn, becoming se- 
lective for invisible object motion. Thus, the representations of visible objects are 
protected from losing their bottom-up input connections during occlusion events. 
In this way, the network can learn separate representations for visible and in- 
visible stimuli. The representations of invisible objects are allowed to develop only 
to the extent that the neurons representing visible objects explicitly disclaim the 
right to represent the objects. These properties prevent the network from los- 
ing complete grounded contact with actual bottom-up visual input, while at the 
same time allowing some neurons to lose their direct bottom-up input connections. 
The disinhibition produces an excitatory response at the target neurons. Dis- 
inhibition is generated according to the following rule: When a neuron has strong, 
Learning to Predict Visibility and Invisibility from Occlusion Events 
