Directional Hearing by the Mauthner 
System 
Audrey L. Gusik 
Department of Psychology 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, Co. 80309 
Robert C. Eaton 
E. P.O. Biology 
University of Colorado 
Boulder, Co. 80309 
Abstract 
We provide a computational description of the function of the Mau- 
thner system. This is the bralnstem circuit which initiates fast- 
start escapes in telcost fish in response to sounds. Our simula- 
tions, using backpropagation in a realistically constrained feedfor- 
ward network, have generated hypotheses which are directly inter- 
pretable in terms of the activity of the auditory nerve fibers, the 
principle cells of the system and their associated inhibitory neu- 
rons. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 THE MAUTHNER SYSTEM 
Much is known about the brainstem system that controls fast-start escapes in teleost 
fish. The most prominent feature of this network is the pair of large Mauthner 
cells whose axons cross the midline and descend down the spinal cord to synapse 
on primary motoneurons. The Mauthner system also includes inhibitory neurons, 
the PHP cells, which have a unique and intense field effect inhibition at the spike- 
initiating zone of the Mauthner cells (Faber and Korn, 1978). The Mauthner system 
is part of the full brainstem escape network which also includes two pairs of cells 
homologous to the Mauthner cell and other populations of reticulospinal neurons. 
With this network fish initiate escapes only from appropriate stimuli, turn away 
from the offending stimulus, and do so very rapidly with a latency around 15 msec 
in goldfish. The Mauthner cells play an important role in these functions. Only one 
574 
Directional Hearing by the Mauthner System 575 
fires thus controlling the direction of the initial turn, and it fires very quickly (4-5 
msec). They also have high thresholds due to instrinsic membrane properties and 
the inhibitory influence of the PHP cells. (For reviews, see Eaton, et al, 1991 and 
Faber and Korn, 1978.) 
Acoustic stimuli are thought to be sufficient to trigger the response (Blaxter, 1981), 
both Manthner cells and PHP cells receive innerration from primary auditory fibers 
(Faber and Korn, 1978). In addition, the Manthner cells have been shown physio- 
logically to be very sensitive to acoustic pressure (Canfield and Eaton, 1990). 
1.2 LOCALIZIN( SOUNDS UNDERWATER 
In contrast to terrestrial vertebrates, there are several reasons for supposing that 
fish do not use time of arrival or intensity differences between the two ears to localize 
sounds: underwater sound travels over four times as fast as in air; the fish body 
provides no acoustic shadow; and fish use a single transducer to sense pressure which 
is conveyed equally to the two ears. Sound pressure is transduced into vibrations 
by the swim bladder which, in goldfish, is mechanically linked to the inner ear. 
Fish are sensitive to an additional component of the acoustic wave, the particle 
motion. Any particle of the medium taking part in the propagation of a longitudehal 
wave will oscillate about an equilibrium point along the axis of propagation. Fish 
have roughly the same density as water, and will experience these oscillations. The 
motion is detected by the bending of sensory hairs on auditory receptor cells by 
the otolith, an inertial mass suspended above the hair cells. This component of the 
sound will provide the axis of propagation, but there is a 180 degree ambiguity. 
Both pressure and particle motion are sensed by hair cells of the inner ear. In 
goldfish these signals may be nearly segregated. The linkage with the swim bladder 
impinges primarily on a honey chamber containing two of the endorgans of the inner 
ear: the saccule and the lagena. The utricle is a third endorgan also thought to 
mediate some acoustic function, without such direct input from the swimbladder. 
Using both of these components fish can localize sounds. According to the phase 
model (Schuijf, 1981) fish analyze the phase difference between the pressure com- 
ponent of the sound and the particle displacement component to calculate distance 
and direction. When pressure is increasing, particles will be pushed in the direc- 
tion of sound propagation, and when pressure is decreasing particles will be pulled 
back. There will be a phase lag between pressure and particle motion which varies 
with frequency and distance from the sound source. This, and the separation of the 
pressure from the displacement signals in the ear of some species pose the greatest 
problems for theories of sound localization in fish. 
The acoustically triggered escape in goldfish is a uniquely tractable problem in 
underwater sound localization. First, there is the fairly good segregation of pressure 
from particle motion at the sensory level. Second, the escape is very rapid. The 
decision to turn left or right is equivalent to the firing of one or the other Manthner 
cell, and this happens within about 4 msec. With transmission delay, this decision 
relies only on the initial 2 msec or so of the stimulus. For most salient frequencies, 
the phase lag will not introduce uncertainty: both the first and second derivatives 
of particle position and acoustic pressure will be either positive or negative. 
576 Guzik and Eaton 
1.3 THE XNOR MODEL 
A 
Active 
pressure 
inpui 
Active 
displacemeni 
input 
Leh 
Mauthner 
outpu 
Right 
Mauthner 
output 
B 
P+ 
P+ 
p- 
p- 
DL 
DR 
DL 
DR 
On 
off 
off 
On 
Off 
On 
On 
Off 
Left sound 
SOLlICe 
DR 
P+ 
p- 
DL 
Mauthner  Mauthncr 
cell X cell 
 0 = excitntory 
No response 
DL 
P+ 
P- 
DR 
Figure 1 Truth table and minimal network for the XNOR model. 
Given the above simplification of the problem, we can see that each Mauthner 
cell must perform a logical operation (Guzik and Eaton, 1993; Eaton et al, 1994). 
The left Mauthner cell should fire when sounds are located on the left, and this 
occurs when either pressure is increasing and particle motion is from the left or 
when pressure is decreasing and particle motion is from the right. We can call 
displacement from the left positive for the left Mauthner cell, and immediately we 
Directional Hearing by the Mauthner System 577 
have the logical operator exclusive-nor (or XNOR). The right Mauthner cell must 
solve the same problem with a redefinition of right displacement as positive. The 
conditions for this logic gate are shown in figure 1A for both Mauthner cells. This 
analysis simplifies our task of understanding the computational role of individual 
elements in the system. For example, a minimal network could appear as in figure 
lB. 
In this model PHP units perform a logical sub-task of the XNOR as AND gates. 
This model requires at least two functional classes of PHP units on each side of 
the brain. These PHP units will be activated for the combinations of pressure 
and displacement that indicate a sound coming from the wrong direction for the 
Mauthner cell on that side. Both Mauthner cells are activated by sufficient changes 
in pressure in either direction, high or low, and will be gated by the PHP cells. This 
minimal model emerged from explorations of the system using the connectionist 
paradigm, and inspired us to extend our efforts to a more realistic context. 
2 THE NETWORK 
We used a connectionist model to explore candidate solutions to the left/right dis- 
crimination problem that include the populations of neurons known to exist and 
include a distributed input resembling the sort available from the hair cells of the 
inner ear. We were interested in generating a number of alternative solutions to be 
better prepared to interpret physiological recordings from live goldfish, and to look 
for variations of, or alternatives to, the XNOR model. 
2.1 THE ARCHITECTURE 
As shown in figure 2, there are four layers in the connectionist model. The input 
layer consists of four pools of hair cell units. These represent the sensory neurons 
of the inner ear. There are two pools on each side: the saccule and the utricle. 
Treating only the hori.ontal plane, we have ignored the lagena in this model. The 
saccule is the organ of pressure sensation and the utricle is treated as the organ 
of particle motion. Each pool contains 16 hair cell units maximally responsive for 
displacements of their sensory hairs in one particular direction. They are activated 
as the cosine of the difference between their preferred direction and the stimulus 
deflection. All other units use sigmoidal activation functions. 
The next layer consists of units representing the auditory fibers of the VIIIth nerve. 
Each pool receives inputs from only one pool of hair cell units, as nerve fibers have 
not been seen to innervate more than one endorgan. There are 10 units per fiber 
pool. 
The fiber units provide input to both the inhibitory PHP units, and to the Mauthner 
units. There are four pools of PHP units, two on each side of the fish. One set 
on each side represents the collateral PHP cells, and the other set represents the 
commissural PHP cells (Faber and Korn, 1978). Both types receive inputs from the 
auditory fibers. The collaterals project only to the Mauthner cell on the same side. 
The commissurals project to both Mauthner cells. There are five units per PHP 
pool. 
578 Guzik and Eaton 
The Mauthner cell units receive inputs from saccular and utricular fibers on their 
same side only, as well as inputs from a single collateral PHP population and both 
commissural PHP populations. 
Left Saccule Left Utricle 
Hair Cells I ] I I 
! l 
Auditory Nerve i 
Fiber Pools 
Right Utricle Right Saccule 
PHPs c-- 
Left Mauthner Right Mauthner 
Figure 2 The architecture. 
Weights from the PHP units are all constrained to be negative, while all others are 
constrained to be positive. The weights are implemented using the function below, 
positive or negative depending on the polarity of the weight. 
f(w) = 1/2 (w + In cosh(w) + In 2) 
The function asymptotes to zero for neg
