Effects of Spatial and Temporal Contiguity on 
the Acquisition of Spatial Information 
Thea B. Ghiselli-Crippa and Paul W. Munro 
Department of Information Science and Telecommunications 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
tbgst@ sis.pitt. edu, munro@ sis.pitt. edu 
Abstract 
Spatial information comes in two forms: direct spatial information (for 
example, retinal position) and indirect temporal contiguity information, 
since objects encountered sequentially are in general spatially close. The 
acquisition of spatial information by a neural network is investigated 
here. Given a spatial layout of several objects, networks are trained on a 
prediction task. Networks using temporal sequences with no direct spa- 
tial information are found to develop internal representations that show 
distances correlated with distances in the external layout. The influence 
of spatial information is analyzed by providing direct spatial information 
to the system during training that is either consistent with the layout or 
inconsistent with it. This approach allows examination of the relative 
contributions of spatial and temporal contiguity. 
1 Introduction 
Spatial information is acquired by a process of exploration that is fundamentally tempo- 
ral, whether it be on a small scale, such as scanning a picture, or on a larger one, such as 
physically navigating through a building, a neighborhood, or a city. Continuous scanning 
of an environment causes locations that are spatially close to have a tendency to occur in 
temporal proximity to one another. Thus, a temporal associative mechanism (such as a 
Hebb rule) can be used in conjunction with continuous exploration to capture the spatial 
structure of the environment [ 1]. However, the actual process of building a cognitive map 
need not rely solely on temporal associations, since some spatial information is encoded in 
the sensory array (position on the retina and proprioceptive feedback). Laboratory studies 
show different types of interaction between the relative contributions of temporal and spa- 
tial contiguities to the formation of an internal representation of space. While Clayton and 
Habibi's [2] series of recognition priming experiments indicates that priming is controlled 
only by temporal associations, in the work of McNamara et al. [3] priming in recogni- 
tion is observed only when space and time are both contiguous. In addition, Curiel and 
Radvansky's [4] work shows that the effects of spatial and temporal contiguity depend on 
whether location or identity information is emphasized during learning. Moreover, other 
experiments ([3]) also show how the effects clearly depend on the task and can be quite 
different if an explicitly spatial task is used (e.g., additive effects in location judgments). 
18 T. B. Ghiselli-Crippa and P. W. Munro 
labels labels 
labels 
(A coeff.) 
, 
labels labels coordinates labels 
coordinates 
(B coeff.) 
Figure 1: Network architectures: temporal-only network (left); spatio-temporal network 
with spatial units part of the input representation (center); spario-temporal network with 
spatial units part of the output representation (right). 
2 Network architectures 
The goal of the work presented in this paper is to study the structure of the internal rep- 
resentations that emerge from the integration of temporal and spatial associations. An 
encoder-like network architecture is used (see Figure 1), with a set of N input units and a 
set of N output units representing N nodes on a 2-dimensional graph. A set of H units is 
used for the hidden layer. To include space in the learning process, additional spatial units 
are included in the network architecture. These units provide a representation of the spatial 
information directly available during the learning/scanning process. In the simulations de- 
scribed in this paper, two units are used and are chosen to represent the (x, y) coordinates of 
the nodes in the graph. The spatial units can be included as part of the input representation 
or as part of the output representation (see Figure 1, center and right panels): both choices 
are used in the experiments, to investigate whether the spatial information could better ben- 
efit training as an input or as an output [5]. In the second case, the relative contribution of 
the spatial information can be directly manipulated by introducing weighting factors in the 
cost function being minimized. A two-term cost function is used, with a cross-entropy term 
for the N label units and a squared error term for the 2 coordinate units, 
I N ] 
E = A - E tilog2(ri) + (1 - ti)log2(1 - ri) 
i----1 
q-Z E(ti-ri) 2 (1) 
i=1 
ri indicates the actual output of unit i and ti its desired output. The relative influence of 
the spatial information is controlled by the coefficients A and B. 
3 Learning tasks 
The left panel of Figure 2 shows an example of the type of layout used; the effective 
layout used in the study consists of N -- 28 nodes. For each node, a set of neighboring 
nodes is defined, chosen on the basis of how an observer might scan the layout to learn the 
node labels and their (spatial) relationships; in Figure 2, the neighborhood relationships are 
represented by lines connecting neighboring nodes. From any node in the layout, the only 
allowed transitions are those to a neighbor, thus defining the set of node pairs used to train 
the network (66 pairs out of C(28, 2) = 378 possible pairs). In addition, the probability 
of occurrence of a particular transition is computed as a function of the distance to the 
corresponding neighbor. It is then possible to generate a sequence of visits to the network 
nodes, aimed at replicating the scanning process of a human observer studying the layout. 
Spatiotemporal Contiguity Effects on Spatial Information Acquisition 19 
cup 
eraser 
coin 
cup 
gun oin- ' - eraser 
c 
button 
Figure 2: Example of a layout (left) and its permuted version (right). Links represent 
allowed transitions. A larger layout of 28 units was used in the simulations. 
The basic learning task is similar to the grammar learning task of Servan-Schreiber et al. 
[6] and to the neighborhood mapping task described in [1] and is used to associate each of 
the N nodes on the graph and its (a:, t) coordinates with the probability distribution of the 
transitions to its neighboring nodes. The mapping can be learned directly, by associating 
each node with the probability distribution of the transitions to all its neighbors: in this 
case, batch learning is used as the method of choice for learning the mapping. On the 
other hand, the mapping can be learned indirectly, by associating each node with itself 
and one of its neighbors, with online learning being the method of choice in this case; 
the neighbor chosen at each iteration is defined by the sequence of visits generated on 
the basis of the transition probabilities. Batch learning was chosen because it generally 
converges more smoothly and more quickly than online learning and gives qualitatively 
similar results. While the task and network architecture described in [1] allowed only 
for temporal association learning, in this study both temporal and spatial associations are 
learned simultaneously, thanks to the presence of the spatial units. However, the temporal- 
only (T-only) case, which has no spatial units, is included in the simulations performed 
for this study, to provide a benchmark for the evaluation of the results obtained with the 
spatio-temporal (S-T) networks. 
The task described above allows the network to learn neighborhood relationships for which 
spatial and temporal associations provide consistent information, that is, nodes experienced 
contiguously in time (as defined by the sequence) are also contiguous in space (being spa- 
tial neighbors). To tease apart the relative contributions of space and time, the task is kept 
the same, but the data employed for training the network is modified: the same layout is 
used to generate the temporal sequence, but the a:, t coordinates of the nodes are randomly 
permuted (see right panel of Figure 2). If the permuted layout is then scanned following the 
same sequence of node visits used in the original version, the net effect is that the temporal 
associations remain the same, but the spatial associations change so that temporally neigh- 
boring nodes can now be spatially close or distant: the spatial associations are no longer 
consistent with the temporal associations. As Figure 4 illustrates, the training pairs (filled 
circles) all correspond to short distances in the original layout, but can have a distance 
anywhere in the allowable range in the permuted layout. Since the temporal and spatial 
distances were consistent in the original layout, the original spatial distance can be used 
as an indicator of temporal distance and Figure 4 can be interpreted as a plot of temporal 
distance vs. spatial distance for the permuted layout. 
The simulations described in the following include three experimental conditions: temporal 
only (no direct spatial information available); space and time consistent (the spatial coor- 
dinates and the temporal sequence are from the same layout); space and time inconsistent 
(the spatial coordinates and the temporal sequence are from different layouts). 
20 T. B. Ghiselli-Crippa and P. W. Munro 
Hidden unit representations are compared using Euclidean distance (cosine and inner prod- 
uct measures give consistent results); the internal representation distances are also used to 
compute their correlation with Euclidean distances between nodes in the layout (original 
and permuted). The correlations increase with the number of hidden units for values of 
H between 5 and 10 and then gradually taper off for values greater than 10. The results 
presented in the remainder of the paper all pertain to networks trained with H = 20 and 
with hidden units using a tanh transfer fun
