18 Harris-Warrick 
MECHANISMS FOR NEUROMODULATION 
OF BIOLOGICAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
Ronald M. Harris-Warrick 
Section of Neurobiology and Behavior 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14853 
ABSTRACT 
The pyloric Central Pattern Generator of the crustacean stomatogastric 
ganglion is a well-defined biological neural network. This 14-neuron 
network is modulated by many inputs. These inputs reconfigure the 
network to produce multiple output patterns by three simple 
mechanisms: 1) determining which cells are active; 2) modulating the 
synaptic efficacy; 3) changing the intrinsic response properties of 
individual neurons. The importance of modifiable intrinsic response 
properties of neurons for network function and modulation is discussed. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Many neural network models aim to understand how a particular process is accomplished 
by a unique network in the nervous system. Most studies have aimed at circuits for 
learning or sensory processing; unfortunately, almost no biological data are available on 
the actual anatomical structure of neural networks serving these tasks, so the accuracy of 
the theoretical models is unknown. Much more is known concerning the structure and 
function of motor circuits generating simple rhythmic movements, especially in simpler 
invertebrate nervous systems (Getting, 1988). Called Central Pattern Generators (CPGs), 
these are rather small circuits of relatively well-defined composition. The output of the 
network is easily measured by monitoring the motor patterns causing movement. 
Research on cellular interactions in CPGs has shown that simple models of fixed circuitry 
for fixed outputs are oversimplified. Instead, these neural networks have evolved with 
maximal flexibility in mind, such that modulatory inputs to the circuit can reconfigure it 
on the fly to generate an almost infinite variety of motor patterns. These modulatory 
inputs, using slow transmitters such as monoamines and peptides, can change every 
component of the network, thus constructing multiple functional circuits from a single 
network (Harris-Warrick, 1988). In this paper, I will describe a model biological system 
to demonstrate the types of flexibility that are built into real neural networks. 
Mechanisms for Neuromodulation of Biological Neural Networks 19 
2 THE CRUSTACEAN STOMATOGASTRIC GANGLION 
The pyloric CPG in the stomatogastric ganglion (STG) of lobsters and crabs is the best- 
understood neural circuit (Selverston and Moulins, 1987). The STG is a tiny ganglion of 
30 neurons that controls rhythmic movements of the foregut. The pyloric CPG controls 
the peristaltic pumping and filtering movements of the pylorus, or posterior part of the 
foregut. This network contains 14 neurons, each of which is unambiguously assignable 
to one of 6 cell types (Figure 1A). Since each neuron can be identified from preparation 
to preparation, detailed studies of the properties of each cell are possible. Thanks to the 
careful work of Selverston and Marder and their colleagues, the anatomical synaptic 
circuitry is completely known (Fig. lA), and consists of chemical synaptic inhibition and 
electrotonic coupling; there is no chemical excitation in the circuit (Miller, 1987). 
Despite the complete knowledge of the synaptic connections within this network, the 
major question of how it works is still an important topic of neurobiological research. 
Early modelling efforts (summarized in Hartline, 1987) showed that, while the pattern of 
mutual synaptic inhibition provided important insights into the phase relations of the 
neurons active in the three-phase motor pattern, pure connectionist models with simple 
threshold elements for neurons were insufficient to explain the motor pattern generaled by 
the network. It has been necessary to understand the intrinsic response properties of each 
neuron in the circuit, which differ markedly from one another in their responses to 
identical stimuli. Most importantly, as will be described below, all 14 neurons are 
conditional oscillators, capable (under the appropriate conditions) of generating rhythmic 
bursts of action potentials in the absence of synaptic input (Bal et al, 1988). This and 
other intrinsic properties of the neurons, coupled with the pattern of mutual synaptic 
inhibition within the circuitry, has generated relatively good models of the pyloric motor 
pauern under a specified set of conditions (Hartline, 1987). 
A. Pyloric circuit 
 ,.._ 
B. Combined 
PDN illIt lair 11til ] ] lilU 
LP-PY . J], ! I: ,, Illi! . I1, ,. ]1,,  
MVN 
(VD) ;; ;;; ;;;;; ;;:; ;;': ;;; : 
C. sucrose block 
E. octopamine 
F. Serotonin 
 mv 
1$ec 
Figure 1: Multiple motor patterns from the pyloric network in the presence of different 
neurotransmitters. A. Synaptic wiring diagram of the pyloric CPG. B.-F. Motor 
patterns observed under different conditions (see text). PDN,LP-PY,MVN traces: 
extracellular recordings of action potentials from indicated neurons. AB: intracellular 
recording from the AB interneuron. From Harris-Warrick and Flamm (1987a). 
20 Harris-Warrick 
3 MULTIPLE MOTOR PATTERNS PRODUCED BY AN 
ANATOMICALLY FIXED NEURAL NETWORK 
When the STG is dissected with intact inputs from other ganglia, the pyloric CPG 
generates a stereotyped motor pattern (Miller, 1987). However, in vivo, the network gen- 
erates a widely varying motor pattern, depending on the feeding state of the animal (Rezer 
and Moulins, 1983). The motor pattern varies in the cycle frequency and regularity, 
which cells are active, the intensity of cell firing, and phase relations. 
This variability can be mimicked in vitro, where experimental control over the system is 
better. Two major experimental approaches have been used. First, transmitters and 
modulators that are present in the input nerve to the STG can be bath-applied, producing 
unique variants on the basic motor theme. Second, identified modulatory neurons can be 
selectively stimulated, activating and altering the ongoing motor pattern. 
As an example, the effects of the monoamines dopamine (DA), serotonin (SHT) and 
octopamine (OCT) on the pyloric motor pattern are shown in Figure 1. When modu- 
latory inputs from other ganglia are present, the pyloric rhythm cycles strongly, with all 
neurons active (Combined). Removal of these inputs usually causes the rhythm to cease, 
and cells are either silent or fire tonically (Sucrose Block). Bath application of some of 
the transmitters present in the input nerve can restore rhythmic cycling. However, the 
motor pattern induced is different and unique for each transmitter tested: clearly the 
pauems induced by DA, 5HT and OCr differ markedly in frequency, intensity, active cells 
and phasing (Flamm and Harris-Warrick, 1986a). The conclusion is that an anatomically 
fixed network can generate a variety of outputs in the presence of different modulatory in- 
puts: the anatomy of the network does not determine its output. 
4 MECHANISMS FOR ALTERATION OF NEURAL 
NETWORK OUTPUT BY NEUROMODULATORS 
We have studied the cellular mechanisms used by monoamines to modify the pyloric 
rhythm. To do this, we isolate a single neuron or single synaptic interaction by selective 
killing of other neurons or pharmacological blockade of synapses (Flamm and Harris- 
Warrick, 1986b). The amine is then added and its direct effects on the neuron or synapse 
determined. Nearly every neuron in the network responded directly to all three amines we 
tested. However, even in this simple 14-neuron circuit, different neurons responded differ- 
ently to a single amine. For example, DA induced rhythmic oscillations and bursting in 
one cell type, hyperpolarized and silenced two others, and depolarized the remaining cells 
to fire tonically (Fig.2). Thus, one cannot use the knowledge of the effects of a 
transmitter on one neuron to infer its actions on other neurons in the same circuit. Our 
studies of the actions of DA, 5HT and OCT on the pyloric network have demonstrated 
three simple mechanisms for altering the output from a network. 
Mechanisms for Neuromodulation of Biological Neural Networks 21 
Control 
AB 
PD Il]]jJ 
VD 
Dopamine 
IC 
Figure 2: Actions of dopamine on isolated neurons from the pyloric network. 
Control: Activity of each neuron when totally isolated from all synaptic input. 
Dopamine: Activity of isolated cell during bath application of 10'4M dopamine. 
4.1 ALTERATION OF THE NEURONS THAT ARE ACTIVE PARTICI- 
PANTS IN THE FUNCTIONAL CIRCUIT 
By simply exciting a silent cell or inhibiting an active cell, a neuromodulator can deter- 
mine which of the cells in a network will actively participate in the generation of the 
motor pattern. Some cells thus are physiologically inactive, even though they are 
anatomically present. 
However, in some cases, unaffected cells can make a significant contribution to the motor 
pattern. Hooper and Marder (1986) have shown that the peptide proctolin activates the 
pyloric rhythm and induces rhythmic oscillations in one neuron. Proctolin has no effect 
on three other neurons that are electrically coupled to the oscillating neuron; these cells 
impose an electrical drag on the oscillator neuron, causing it to cycle more slowly than it 
does when isolated from these cells. Thus, the unaffected cells cause the whole motor 
pattern to cycle more slowly. 
4.2 ALTERATION OF THE SYNAPTIC EFFICACY OF 
CONNECTIONS WITHIN THE NETWORK 
The flexibility of synaptic interactions is well-known and is used in virtually all models 
of plasticity in neural networks. By changing the amount of transmitter released from the 
pre-synaptic terminal or the post-synaptic responsiveness (either by altering the mem- 
brane resistance or the number of receptors), the strength of a synapse can be altered over 
an order of magnitude. Obviously, this will have important effects on the phase relations 
of neurons firing in the network. 
In the STG, the situation is complicated b
