Information Theoretic Analysis of 
Connection Structure from Spike Trains 
Satoru Shiono* 
Central Research Laboratory 
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation 
Amagasaki, Hyogo 661, Japau 
Satoshi Yamada 
Central Research Laboratory 
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation 
Amagasaki, Hyogo 661, Japan 
Michio Nakashima 
Central Research Laboratory 
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation 
Amagasaki, Hyogo 661, Japau 
Kenji Matsumoto 
Fculty of Pharmaceutical Science 
Hokkidou University 
Sapporo, Hokkaidou 060, Japau 
Abstract 
We have attempted to use information theoretic quantities for aa- 
lyzing neuronal connection structure from spike trains. Two point 
mutual information and its maximum value, channel capacity, be- 
tween a pir of neurons were found to be useful for sensitive de- 
tection of crosscorrelation and for estimation of synaptic strength, 
respectively. Three point mutual information among three neurons 
could give their interconnection structure. Therefore, our informa- 
tion theoretic analysis was shown to be a very powerful technique 
for deducing neuronal connection structure. Some concrete exam- 
ples of its application to simulated spike trMns are presented. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The deduction of neuronal connection structure from spike trains, including synaptic 
strength estimation, has long been one of the central issues for understanding the 
structure and function of the neuronal circuit and thus the information processing 
*corresponding author 
515 
516 Shiono, Yamada, Nakashima, and Matsumoto 
mechanism at the neuronal circuitry level. A variety of crosscorrelational techniques 
for two or more neurons have been proposed axtd utilized (e.g., Melssen aztd Epping, 
1987; Aertsen et. al., 1989). There are, however, some difficulties with those 
techniques, as discussed by, e.g., Yang and Shamma (1990). It is sometimes difficult 
for the method to distinguish a significant crosscorrelation from noise, especially 
when the amount of experimental data is limited. The quantitative estimation 
of synaptic connectivity is another difficulty. And it is impossible to determine 
whether two neurons are directly connected or not, only by finding a significant 
crosscorrelation between them. 
The information theory has been shown to afford a powerful tool for the description 
of neuronal input-output relations, such as in the investigation on the neuronal cod- 
ing of the visual cortex (Eckhorn et. al., 1976; Optican and Richmond, 1987). But 
there has been no extensive study to apply it to the correlational analysis of action 
potential trains. Because a correlational method using information theoretic quan- 
tities is considered to give a better correlational measure, the information theory is 
expected to offer a unique correlational method to overcome the bove difficulties. 
In this paper, we describe information theory-based correlational aztalysis for action 
potential trains, using two and three point mutual information (MI) and chamnel 
cpacity. Because the information theoretic analysis by two point MI and channel 
cpacity will be published in near future (Yamada et. al., 1993a), more detMled de- 
scription is given here on the amalysis by three point MI for infering the relationship 
mong three neurons. 
2 
CORRELATIONAL ANALYSIS BASED ON 
INFORMATION THEORY 
2.1 INFORMATION THEORETIC QUANTITIES 
According to the information theory, the n point mutual information expresses the 
amount of information shared among n processes (McGill, 1955). Let X, Y and 
Z be processes, and t and s be the time delays of X and Y from Z, respectively. 
Using Shannon entropies H, two point MI between X and Y and three point MI, 
are defined (Shannon, 1948; Ikeda et. al., 1989): 
_(X: ) = H(X) + H(L) - H(X,, ), (1) 
I(X, : Y : Z) = H(X,) + H(Y)+ H(Z) - H(X,,Y,) 
-H(Y,Z) - H(Z,X,) + H(X,,Y,,Z). (2) 
I(X, : Y, : Z) is related to I(X, : Y,) as follows: 
r(x, : : z)= r(x, : v,)- r(x, : V, lZ), (3) 
where I(X: YslZ) means the two point conditional MI between X and Y if the 
state of Z is given. On the other hand, channel capacity is given by (r = s - t), 
CC(X: Yr)= maxI(X: Yr). (4) 
p(x,) 
We consider now X, Y and Z to be neurons whose spike activity has been measured. 
Information Theoretic Analysis of Connection Structure from Spike Trains 517 
Two point MI and two point conditional MI are obtained by (i, j, k = 0, 1), 
p(yj,,-[xi) 
I(X : Y,-) -- Ep(yj,,-]x,)p(x,)log p(yj,,.) , (5) 
i,j 
P(Xt' YJ'slzl ) (6) 
I(Xt : YslZ) - E p(xi,, yj,lzl )p(zl ) log p(x,,lzl )p(yj,lzl  ). 
i ,j,k 
where x, y and z mean the states of neurons, e.g., xx for the firing state and 
x0 for the non-firing state of X, and p( ) denotes probability. And three point 
MI is obtained by using Equation (3). Those information theoretic quantities are 
calculated by using the probabilities estimated from the spike trains of X, Y and Z 
after the spike trains are converted into time sequences consisting of 0 and 1 with 
discrete time steps, as described elswhere (Yamada et. al., 1993a). 
2.2 
PROCEDURE FOR THREE POINT MUTUAL INFORMATION 
ANALYSIS 
Suppose that a three point MI peak is found at (to, so) in the t, s-plane (see Figure 1). 
The three time delays, t0, so d r = so -to, are obtained. They are supposed to be 
time delays in three possible interconnections between any pair of neurons. Because 
the peak is not significant if only one pMr of the three neurons is interconnected, two 
or three of the possible interconnections with corresponding time delays should trnly 
work to produce the peak. We will utilize I(n : m) and I(n : roll ) (n, m, I = X, Y or 
Z) at the peak to find working interconnections out of them. These quantities are 
obtained by recalcnlating each probability in Equations (5) and (6) over the whole 
peak region. 
If two neurons, e.g., X and Y, are not interconnected either I(X: Y) or I(X: Y[Z) 
is equal to zero. The reverse proposition, however, is not true. The necessary 
and snfllcient condition for having no interconnection is obtained by calculating 
I(n: m) and I(n: roll ) for all possible interconnection structures. The neurons are 
rearranged and renamed A, B and C in the order of the time delays. There are only 
four interconnection structures, as shown in Table 1. 
I: No interconnection between A and B. A and B are statistically independent, i.e., 
p(a,,bj): p(ai)p(bj), I(A: B)= 0. The three point MI peak is negative. 
II: No interconnection between A and C. The states of A and C are statistically in- 
dependent when the state of B is given, i.e., p(ai, cklbj) = p(ailbj)p(cklbj), 
I(A: C[B) = 0. The peak is positive. 
III: No interconnection between B and C. Similar to case II, because p(bj, c ]ai) = 
p(bj[ai)p(ca[ai), I(B: cla): 0. The peak is positive. 
IV: Three interconnections. The above three cases are considered to occur concoIni- 
tautly in this case. The pek is positive or negative, depending on their 
relative contributions. Because A and B should have an apparent effect on 
the firing-probability of the postsynaptic neurons, I(A: B), I(A: C[B) 
and I(B: C[A) are all non-zero except for the case where the ativity of 
B completely coincides with that of A with the specified time delay (in 
this case, both I(A: CIB) and I(B: CIA ) are zero (see Vamada et. al., 
1993b)). 
518 Shiono, Yamada, Nakashima, and Matsumoto 
Table 1. Interconnection Structure and Information Theoretic Quantities 
Interconnection 
Structure 
2 point MI 
I(A:B) = 0 > 0 > 0 > 0 
I(A:C) _0 >0 >0 _0 
I(B:C) _0 >0 >0 _0 
2 point condition MI 
I(A:B [C) > 0 _ 0 -- 0 -- 0 
I(A:C [ B) > 0 = 0 -- 0 > 0 
I(B:C I A) > 0 _ 0 = 0 > 0 
3 point MI 
I(A:B:C) _ _ - - or 
From what we have described above, the interconnection structure for a three point 
MI peak is deduced utilizing the following procedure; 
(a) A negative 3pMI peak: it corresponds to case I or IV. The problem is to 
determine whether A and B are interconnected or not. 
(1) If I(A: B) = 0, case I. 
(2) If I(A: B) > 0, case IV. 
(b) A positive 3pMI peak: it corresponds to case II, III or IV. The existence of the 
A-G and B-G interconnections has to be checked. 
(1) 
(2) 
(4) 
I(A : CIB) > 0 and I(B : CIA ) > 0, case IV. 
I(A : CIB) = o and I(B : CIA) > 0, cse II. 
If I(A: C[B) > 0 and I(B: C[A) = 0, case III. 
If I(A: C[B) = 0 and I(B: C[A) = 0, the interconnection structure 
cannot be deduced except for the A-B interconnection. 
This procedure is applicable, if all the time delays are non-zero. If otherwise, some 
of the interconnections cannot be determined (Yamada et. al., 1993b). 
3 SIMULATED SPIKE TRAINS 
In order to characterize our information theoretic analysis, simulations of neu- 
ronal network models were carried out. We used a model neuron described by 
Information Theoretic Analysis of Connection Structure from Spike Trains 519 
the Hodgkin-Huxley equations (Yamadd et. al., 1989). The used equations and pa- 
rameters were described (YamdAd et. aL, 1993a). The Hodgkin-Huxley equations 
were mathematically integrated by the Runge-Kutta-Gill technique. 
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
4.1 
ANALYSIS BY TWO POINT MUTUAL INFORMATION AND 
CHANNEL CAPACITY 
The performance was previously reported of the information theoretic analysis by 
two point MI and channel capacity (Yamadd et. al., 1993a). 
Briefly, this anlytical method was compared with some conventional ones for both 
excitatory and inhibitory connections using action potential trains obtained by the 
simulation of a model neuronal network. It was shown to have the following ad- 
vantages. First, it reduced correlational measures within the bounds of noise nd 
simultaneously amplified beyond the bounds by its nonlinear function. It should be 
easier in its crosscorrelation graph to find a neuron pair having a weak but signif- 
icant interaction, especially when the synaptic strength is small or the mount of 
experimental data is limited. Second, channel capacity was shown to allow fairly 
effective estimat
