Effects of Spike Timing Underlying 
Binocular Integration and Rivalry in a 
Neural Model of Early Visual Cortex 
Erik D. Lumer 
Wellcome department of Cognitive Neurology 
Institute of Neurology, University College of London 
12 Queen Square, London, WCIN 3BG, UK 
Abstract 
In normal vision, the inputs from the two eyes are inte- 
grated into a single percept. When dissimilar images are 
presented to the two eyes, however, perceptual integra- 
tion gives way to alternation between monocular inputs, 
a phenomenon called binocular rivalry. Although recent 
evidence indicates that binocular rivalry involves a mod- 
ulation of neuronal responses in extrastriate cortex, the 
basic mechanisms responsible for differential processing of 
conflicting and congruent stimuli remain unclear. Using a 
neural network that models the mammalian early visual 
system, I demonstrate here that the desynchronized fir- 
ing of cortical-like neurons that first receive inputs from 
the two eyes results in rivalrous activity patterns at later 
stages in the visual pathway. By contrast, synchronization 
of firing among these cells prevents such competition. The 
temporal coordination of cortical activity and its effects 
on neural competition emerge naturally from the network 
connectivity and from its dynamics. These results suggest 
that input-related differences in relative spike timing at 
an early stage of visual processing may give rise to the 
phenomena both of perceptual integration and rivalry in 
binocular vision. 
Introduction 
The neural determinants of visual perception can be probed by subjecting the visual 
system to ambiguous viewing conditions - stimulus configurations that admit more 
188 E. D. Lumer 
than one perceptual interpretation. For example, when a left-tilted grating is shown 
to the left eye and a right-tilted grating to the right eye, the two stimuli are momen- 
tarily perceived together as a plaid pattern, but soon only one line grating becomes 
visible, while the other is suppressed. This phenomenon, known as binocular rivalry, 
has long been thought to involve competition between monocular neurons within 
the primary visual cortex (V1), leading to the suppression of information from one 
eye (Lehky, 1988; Blake, 1989). It has recently been shown, however, that neurons 
whose activity coyaries with perception during rivalry are found mainly in higher 
cortical areas and respond to inputs from both eyes, thus suggesting that rivalry 
arises instead through competition between alternative stimulus interpretations in 
extrastriate cortex (Leopold and Logothetis, 1996). Because eye-specific informa- 
tion appears to be lost at this stage, it remains unclear how the stimulus conditions 
(i.e. conflicting monocular stimuli) yielding binocular rivalry are distinguished from 
the conditions (i.e. matched monocular inputs) that produce stable single vision. 
I propose here that the degree of similarity between the images presented to the 
two eyes is registered by the temporal coordination of neuronal activity in V1, and 
that changes in relative spike timing within this area can instigate the differential 
responses in higher cortical areas to conflicting or congruent visual stimuli. Stim- 
ulus and eye-specific synchronous activity has been described previously both in 
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and in the striate cortex (Gray et al., 1989; 
Sillito et al., 1994; Neuenschwander and Singer, 1996). It has been suggested that 
such synchrony may serve to bind together spatially distributed neural events into 
coherent representations (Milner, 1974; yon der Malsburg, 1981; Singer, 1993). In 
addition, reduced synchronization of striate cortical responses in strabismic cats has 
been correlated with their perceptual inability to combine signals from the two eyes 
or to incorporate signals from an amblyopic eye (K/Snig et al., 1993; Roelfsema et 
al., 1994). However, the specific influences of interocular input-similarity on spike 
coordination in the striate cortex, and of spike coordination on competition in other 
cortical areas, remain unclear. 
To examine these influences, a simplified neural model of an early visual pathway 
is simulated. In what follows, I first describe the anatomical and physiological con- 
straints incorporated in the model, and then show that a temporal patterning of 
neuronal activity in its primary cortical area emerges naturally. By manipulating 
the relative spike timing of neuronal discharges in this area, I demonstrate its role 
in inducing differential responses in higher visual areas to conflicting or congru- 
ent visual stimulation. Finally, I discuss possible implications of these results for 
understanding the neural basis of normal and ambiguous perception in vivo. 
2 Model overview 
The model has four stages based on the organization of the mammalian visual path- 
way (Gilbert, 1993). These stages represent: (i) sectors of an ipsilateral ('left eye') 
and a contralateral ('right eye') lamina of the LGN, which relay visual inputs to 
the cortex; (ii) two corresponding monocular regions in layer 4 of V1 with different 
ocular dominance; (iii) a primary cortical sector in which the monocular inputs are 
first combined (called Vp in the model); and (iv) a secondary visual area of cortex 
in which higher-order features are extracted (Vs in the model; Fig. 1). Each stage 
consists of 'standard' integrate-and-fire neurons that are incorporated in synaptic 
networks. At the cortical stages, these units are grouped in local recurrent circuits 
that are similar to those used in previous modeling studies (Douglas et al., 1995; 
Somers et al., 1995). Synaptic interactions in these circuits are both excitatory and 
inhibitory between cells with similar orientation selectivity, but are restricted to in- 
Spike Timing Effects in Binocular Integration and Rivalry 189 
vp 
layer 4 
LGN 
Left Right 
input input 
Figure 1: Architecture of the model. Excitatory and inhibitory connections are rep- 
resented by lines with arrowheads and round terminals, respectively. Each lamina 
in the LGN consists of 100 excitatory units (Ex) and 100 inhibitory units (Inh), 
coupled via local inhibition. Cortical units are grouped into local recurrent circuits 
(stippled boxes), each comprising 200 Ex units and 100 Inh units. In each monoc- 
ular patch of layer 4, one cell group (Exl and Inhl) responds to left-tilted lines 
(orientation 1), whereas a second group (Ex2 and Inh2) is selective for right-tilted 
lines (orientation 2). The same orientation selectivities are remapped onto Vp and 
Vs, although cells in these areas respond to inputs from both eyes. In addition, 
convergent inputs from Vp to Vs establish a third selectivity in Vs, namely for line 
crossings (Ex+ and Inh+). 
hibition only between cell groups with orthogonal orientation preference (Kisvrday 
and Eysel, 1993). Two orthogonal orientations (orientation I and 2) are mapped 
in each monocular sector of layer 4, and in Vp. To account for the emergence of 
more complex response properties at higher levels in the visual system (Van Essen 
and Gallant, 1994), forward connectivity patterns from Vp to Vs are organized to 
support three feature selectivities in Vs, one for orientation 1, one for orientation 2, 
and one for the conjunction of these two orientations, i.e. for line crossings. These 
forward projections are reciprocated by weaker backward projections from Vs to 
Vp. As a general rule, connections are established at random within and between 
interconnected populations of cells, with connection probabilities between pairs of 
cells ranging from i to 10 %, consistent with experimental estimates (Thomson et 
al., 1988; Mason et al., 1991). Visual stimulation is achieved by applying a stochas- 
tic synaptic excitation independently to activated cells in the LGN. A quantitative 
description of the model parameters will be reported elsewhere. 
190 E. D. Lumer 
3 Results 
In a first series of simulations, the responses of the model to conflicting and con- 
gruent visual stimuli are compared. When tile left input consists of left-tilted lines 
(orientation 1) and the right input of right-tilted lines (orientation 2), rivalrous re- 
sponse suppression occurs in the secondary visual area. At any moment, only one 
of the three feature-selective cell groups in Vs can maintain elevated firing rates 
(Fig. 2a). By contrast, when congruent plaid patterns are used to stimulate the 
two monocular channels, these cell groups are forced in a regime in which they all 
sustain elevated firing rates (Fig. 2b). This concurrent activation of cells selective 
for orthogonal orientations and for line crossings can be interpreted as a distributed 
representation of the plaid pattern in Vs  A quantitative assessment of the de- 
gree of competition in Vs is shown in Figure 2c. The rivalry index of two groups 
of neurons is defined as the mean absolute value of the difference between their 
instantaneous group-averaged firing rates divided by the highest instantaneous fir- 
ing rate among the two cell groups. This index varies between 0 for nonrivalrous 
groups of neurons and I for groups of neurons with mutually exclusive patterns of 
activity. Groups of cells with different selectivity in Vs have a significantly higher 
rivalry index when stimulated by conflicting rather than by congruent visual inputs 
(p < 0.0001) (Fig. 2c). 
Note that, in the example shown in Figure 2a, the differential responses to conflicting 
inputs develop from about 200 ms after stimulus onset and are maintained over 
the remainder of the stimulation epoch. In other simulations, alternation between 
dominant and suppressed responses was also observed over the same epoch as a 
result of fluctuations in the overall network dynamics. A detailed analysis of the 
dynamics of perceptual alternation during rivalry, however, is beyond the scope of 
this report. 
Although Vp exhibits a sim
