Signal Detection in Noisy Weakly-Active 
Dendrites 
Amit Manwani and Christof Koch 
{quixote, koch}@klab. cal tech. edu 
Computation and Neural Systems Program 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
Here we derive measures quantifying the information loss of a synaptic 
signal due to the presence ofneuronal noise sources, as it electrotonically 
propagates along a weakly-active dendrite. We model the dendrite as an 
infinite linear cable, with noise sources distributed along its length. The 
noise sources we consider are thermal noise, channel noise arising from 
the stochastic nature of voltage-dependent ionic channels (K + and Na +) 
and synaptic noise due to spontaneous background activity. We assess the 
efficacy of information transfer using a signal detection paradigm where 
the objective is to detect the presence/absence of a presynaptic spike from 
the post-synaptic membrane voltage. This allows us to analytically assess 
the role of each of these noise sources in information transfer. For our 
choice of parameters, we find that the synaptic noise is the dominant 
noise source which limits the maximum length over which information 
be reliably transmitted. 
1 Introduction 
This is a continuation of our efforts (Manwani and Koch, 1998) to understand the informa- 
tion capacity of a neuronal link (in terms of the specific nature of neural hardware) by a 
systematic study of information processing at different biophysical stages in a model of a 
single neuron. Here we investigate how the presence of neuronal noise sources influences 
the information transmission capabilities of a simplified model of a weakly-active dendrite. 
The noise sources we include are, thermal noise, channel noise arising from the stochastic 
nature of voltage-dependent channels (K + and Na +) and synaptic noise due to spontaneous 
background activity. We characterize the noise sources using analytical expressions of their 
current power spectral densities and compare their magnitudes for dendritic parameters re- 
ported in literature (Mainen and Sejnowski, 1998). To assess the role of these noise sources 
on dendritic integration, we consider a simplified scenario and model the dendrite as a lin- 
Signal Detection in Noisy Weakly-Active Dendrites 133 
LSynapse 
V,(x,t) 
Optimal 1 Spike 
Detector I No spie P 
Cable /Measurement 
y Noise Sources x 
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of a simplified dendritic channel. The dendrite is modeled a weakly- 
active 1-D cable with noise sources distributed along its length. Loss of signal fidelity as it propagates 
from a synaptic location (input) !/to a measurement (output) location z is studied using a signal 
detection task. The objective is to optimally detect the presence of the synaptic input I(!/, t) (in the 
form of a unitary synaptic event) on the basis of the noisy voltage waveform Vm (z, t), filtered by the 
cable's Green's function and corrupted by the noise sources along the cable. The probability of error, 
Pe is used to quantify task performance. 
ear, infinite, one-dimensional cable with distributed current noises. When the noise sources 
are weak so that the corresponding voltage fluctuations are small, the membrane voltage 
satisfies a linear stochastic differential equation satisfied. Using linear cable theory, we ex- 
press the power spectral density of the voltage noise in terms of the Green's function of an 
infinite cable and the current noise spectra. We use these results to quantify the efficacy of 
information transfer under a signal detection paradigm  where the objective is to detect 
the presence/absence of a presynaptic spike (in the form of an epsc) from the post-synaptic 
membrane voltage along the dendrite. The formalism used in this paper is summarized in 
Figure 1. 
2 Neuronal Noise Sources 
In this section we consider some current noise sources present in nerve membranes which 
distort a synaptic signal as it propagates along a dendrite. An excellent treatment of mem- 
brane noise is given in DeFelice (1981) and we refer the reader to it for details. For a linear 
one-dimensional cable, it is convenient to express quantities in specific length units. Thus, 
we express all conductances in units of S/ttm and current power spectra in units of A2/Hz 
/zm. 
A. Thermal Noise 
Thermal noise arises due to the random thermal agitation of electrical charges in a con- 
ductor and represents a fundamental lower limit of noise in a system. A conductor of 
resistance R is equivalent to a noiseless resistor R in series with a voltage noise source 
Vtt (t) of spectral density Svtt (f) = 2kTR (V2/Hz), or a noiseless resistor R in parallel 
with a current noise source,/ta (t) of spectral density S,rth (f) = 2kT/R (A2/Hz), where k 
is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature of the conductor 2. The trans- 
verse resistance r, (units off ttm) of a nerve membrane is due to the combined resistance 
of the lipid bilayer and the resting conductances of various voltage-gated, ligand-gated and 
leak channels embedded in the lipid matrix. Thus, the current noise due to rra, has power 
For sake of brevity, we do not discuss the corresponding signal estimation paradigm as in Man- 
wani and Koch (1998). 
2Since the power spectra of real signals are even functions of frequency, we choose the double- 
sided convention for all power spectral densities. 
134 A. Manwani and C. Koch 
spectral density, 
2kT 
$,rtn(f) = (1) 
B. Channel Noise 
Neuronal membranes contain microscopic voltage-gated and ligand-gated channels which 
open and close randomly. These random fluctuations in the number of channels is another 
source of membrane noise. We restrict ourselves to voltage-gated K + and Na + channels, 
although the following can be used to characterize noise due to other types of ionic channels 
as well. In the classical Hodgkin-Huxley formalism (Koch, 1998), a K + channel consists 
of four identical two-state sub-units (denoted by n) which can either be open or closed. 
The K + channel conducts only when all the sub-units are in their open states. Since the 
sub-units are identical, the channel can be in one of five states; from the state in which 
all the sub-units are closed to the open state in which all sub-units are open. Fluctuations 
in the number of open channels cause a random K + current I: of power spectral density 
(DeFelice, 1981) 
4 
= - EK) no.  (1 -- ',,oo) ',% . 
i= 1 + 4r2 f2(O,/i)2 (2) 
where r/:, '),: and E: denote the K + channel density (per unit length), the K + single 
channel conductance and the K + reversal potential respectively. Here we assume that the 
membrane voltage has been clamped to a value Vm. noo and 0, are the steady-state open 
probability and relaxation time constant of a single K + sub-unit respectively and are in 
general non-linear functions of V, (Koch, 1998). When V, is close to the resting potential 
Vrest (usually between -70 to -65 mV), noo << 1 and one can simplify SK (f) as 
2 V - 2 4 
SK(f)  IK'YK( rest -- (3) 
E:) noo(1 noo) 4 2 0,/4 
1 q- 4rr2f2(O./4)2 
Similarly, the Hodgkin-Huxley Na + channel is characterized by three identical activation 
sub-units (denoted by m) and an inactivation sub-unit (denoted by h). The Na + channel 
conducts only when all the m sub-units are open and the h sub-unit is not inactivated. Thus, 
the Na + channel can be in one of eight states from the state corresponding to all m sub- 
units closed and the h sub-unit inactivated to the open state with all m sub-units open and 
the h sub-unit not inactivated. moo (resp. boo) and 0, (resp. 0h) are the corresponding 
steady-state open probability and relaxation time constant of a single Na + m (resp. h) 
sub-unit respectively. For Vm -, Vrest, moo << 1, boo  1 and 
2 20m/3 
Sva(f) m Wvaq'v(Vrest Ev):m3(1 a : 
- -moo) hoo 1 +4rr2f2(Om/3)2 (4) 
where r/v, ')'v and Eva denote the Na + channel density, the Na + single channel con- 
ductance and the sodium reversal potential respectively. 
C. $ynaptic Noise 
In addition to voltage-gated ionic channels, dendrites are also awash in ligand-gated synap- 
tic receptors. We restrict our attention to fast voltage-independent (AMPA-like) synapses. 
A commonly used function to represent the postsynaptic conductance change in response 
to a presynaptic spike is the alpha function (Koch, 1998) 
ga(t) -- gpeak e t e -t/tvea, 0 < t < oo (5) 
tpea k -- 
where gpeak denotes the peak conductance change and tpeak the time-to-peak of the con- 
ductance change. We shall assume that for a spike train s(t) = -.j 6(t - tj), the postsy- 
naptic conductance is given gSy, (t) -- y'j ga (t -- t j). This ignores inter-spike interaction 
Signal Detection in Noisy Weakly-Active Dendrites 135 
r i 
Cm 
EK-- I-- ENd-- Esyn T EL T 
Figure 2: Schematic diagram of the equivalent electrical circuit of a linear dendritic cable. The 
dendrite is modeled as an infinite ladder network. ri (units of f/tt m) denotes the longitudinal cyto- 
plasmic resistance; Cm (units of F/it m) and g, (units of S/it m) denote the transverse membrane ca- 
pacitance and conductance (due to leak channels with reversal potential E,) respectively. The mem- 
brane also contains active channels (K +, Na +) with conductances and reversal potentials denoted by 
(gc, gva) and (Ec, Eva) respectively, and fast voltage-independent (AMPA-like) synapses with 
conductance gs and reversal potential Es. 
and synaptic saturation. The synaptic current is given by isu (t) = gsu (t)(Vm - ESu) 
where Esu is the synaptic reversal potential. If the spike train can be modeled as a homo- 
geneous Poisson process with mean firing rate ,, the power spectrum of isu (t) can be 
computed using Campbell's theorem (Papoulis, 1991) 
$sun(f) - rIsun/kn(Vm - Esun) 2 [ G(f) I 2 , (6) 
where r/sun denotes the synaptic density and G (f) = f ga (t) ezp(-j2rrft) dt is the 
Fourier transform ofg (t). Substituting f
