Dynamically-Adaptive Winner-Take-All Networks 
Tret E. Lange 
Computer Scienos Department 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90024 
Abstract 
Winner-Take-All (WTA) networks, in which inhibitory interconnec- 
tions are used to determine the most highly-activated of a pool of units, 
are an important part of many neural network models. Unfortunately, 
convergence of normal WTA networks is extremely sensitive to the 
magnitudes of their weights, which must be hand-tuned and which gen- 
erally only provide the right amount of inhibition across a relatively 
small range of initial conditions. This paper presents Dynamically- 
Adaptive Winner-Take-All (DAWTA) networks, which use a regulatory 
unit to provide the competitive inhibition to the units in the network. 
The DAWTA regulatory unit dynamically adjusts its level of activation 
during competition to provide the right amount of inhibition to differ- 
entiate between competitors and drive a single winner. This dynamic 
adaptation allows DAWTA networks to perform the winner-take-all 
function for nearly any network size or initial condition, using O(N) 
connections. In addition, the DAWTA regulatory unit can be biased to 
find the level of inhibition necessary to settle upon the K most highly- 
activated units, and therefore serve as a K-Winners-Take-All network. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Winner-Take-All networks are fixed group of units which compete by mutual inhibition 
until the unit with the highest initial activation or input level suppresses the activation of 
all the others. Winner-take-all selection of the most highly-activated unit is an impoant 
part of many neural network models (e.g. McCleiland and Rumelhan, 1981; Feidman and 
Ballard, 1982; Kohonen, 1984; Touretzky, 1989; Lange and Dyer, 1989a,b). 
Unfortunately, successful convergence in winner-take-all networks is extremely sensitive 
to the magnitudes of the inhibitory weights between units and other network parameters. 
For example, a weight value for the mutually-inhibitory connections allowing the most 
highly-activated unit to suppress the other units in one initial condition (e.g. Figure la) 
may not provide enough inhibition to select a single winner if the initial input activation 
levels are closer together and/or higher (e.g. Figure lb). On the other hand, if the compe- 
341 
342 
Lange 
1.0 ' 
0.8' 
0.7, 
0.8. 
0.5. 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
0 
1o0- 
0.8; 
o. 
0.8; 
0.5-' 
0.4-' 
0.3 -' 
0.2-' 
0.1  
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 gO 100 
0 10 20 30 40 50 {) 70 ) gO 100 
1.0 ,, 
-1.0 
-3.0 
-5.0 
-7.0 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Figure 1. Several plots of activation venus time for different initial condi- 
tions in a winner-take-all network in which there is a bidirectional inhibitory 
connection of weight 4).2 between every pair of units. Unit activation function 
is that from the interactive activation model of McClelland and Rumelhart 
(1981). (a) Network in which five units are given an input self bias ranging 
from 0.10 to 0.14. (b) Network in which five units are given an input self bias 
ranging from 0.50 to 0.54. Note that the network ended up with three winners 
because the inhibitory connections of weight 4).2 did not provide enough inhibi- 
tion to suppress the second and third most-active nodes. (c) Network in which 
100 units are given an input self bias ranging from 0.01 to 0.14. 'Flax combined 
activation of all 100 nodes through the inhibitory weight of -0.2 provides far too 
much inhibition, causing the network to overreact and oscillate wildly 
tiffon involves a larger number of active units, then the same inhibitory weights may 
provide too much inhibition and either suppress the activations of all units or lead to 
oscillations (e.g. Figure lc). 
Dynamically-Adaptive Winner-Take-All Networks 343 
Because of these problems, it is genea'ally necessary to hand-tune nelw panm to 
allow for successful winner-take-all perf in a given neural network 'chiecture 
having certain expected levels of incoming activations. For complex networks, hin can 
require a detailed mathematical analysis of the model (cf. Toumuky & Hinton, 1988) ot a 
heuristic, computer-assisted trial-and-error search process (cf. Reggia, 1989) to find the 
values of inhibitory weights, tinit thresholds, and other network pammete necessary for 
clear-cut winner-take-all performance in a given model's input space. In some cases, 
however, no set of network constant network parmneters can be found to handle the range 
of possible initial conditions a model may be faced with (Barnden, Kankanahalli, and 
Dharmavarat 1990), such as when the numbers of units actually comg in a given 
network may be two at one time and thousands at another (e.g. Barnden, 1990;, Lange, in 
press). 
This paper presents a new variant of winner-lake-all netw the Dally-Adaptive 
Winner-Take-All (DAWTA) network. DAWTA network,n, using O(N) connections, are 
able to robustly act as winner-take-all networks for nearly any network initial condition 
without any hand-tuning of network parameters. In , the DAWTA network dy- 
namically tunes itself by adjusting the level of inhibition sent to each unit in the net- 
work depending upon feedback from the current conditions of the competition. In addi- 
tion, a biasing activation can be added to the network to allow it to act as a K-Winners- 
Take-All network (cf. Majani, Erlanson, and Abu-Mostafa, 1989), in which the K most 
highly-activated units end up active. 
2. DYNAMICALLY-ADAPTIVE WTA NETWORKS 
The basic idea behind the Dynamically-Adaptive Winner-Take-All mechanism can be de- 
scribed by looking at a version of a winner-take-all network that is functionally equivalent 
to a normal winner-take-all network but which uses only O(N) connections. Several re- 
searchers have pointed out that the (N2-N)]2 bidirectional inhibitory connections (each of 
weight -w 1) normally needed in a winner-take-all network can be replaced by an excitatory 
serf-connection of weight w I for each unit and a single regulatr-y unit that sums up the 
activations of all N units and inhibits them each by that -w I times that amount 
(Touretzky & Hinton, 1988; Majani et al., 1989) (see Figure 2). 
When viewed in this fashion, the mutually inhibitory connections of winner-take-all net- 
works can be seen as a regulator (i.e. the regulatory unit) that is attempting to provide the 
right amount of inhibition to the network to allow the winner-to-be unit's activation to 
grow while suppressing the activations of all others. This is exactly what happens when 
Wl has been chosen correctly for the activations of the network (as in Figure la). 
However, because the amount of this regulatory inhibition is fixed precisely by that in- 
hibitory weight (i.e. always equal to that weight times the sum of the network activa- 
tions), there is no way for it to increase when it is not enough (as in Figure lb) or de- 
crease when it is too much (as in Figure lc). 
2.1. THE DAWTA REGULATORY UNIT 
From the point of view of the competing units' inputs, the Dynamically-Adaptive 
Winner-Take-All network is equivalent to the regulatory-unit simplification of a normal 
winner-take-all network. Each unit has an excitatory connection to itself and an in- 
hibitory connection from a regulatory unit whose function is to suppress the activations 
344 Lange 
Figure 2. Simplification of a standard W'rA network using O(n) connecfiom 
by inlxoduction of a regulatory unit (top node) that sums up the afivafions of all 
network units. Each unit has an excitatory connection to itself and an inlu'bitm3t 
connection of weight -wt from the regulatory unit. Shading of units (darker = 
higher) represents their levels of activation at a hypothetical time in the middle 
of network cycling. 
of all but the winning unit 1. However, the regulatory unit itself, and how it calculates 
the inhibition it provides to the network, is different. 
Whereas the connections to the regulatory unit in a normal winner-take-all network cause 
it to produce an inhibitory activation (i.e. the sum of the units' activations) that happens 
to work if its inhibitory weights were set correctly, the sU'ucture of connections to the 
regulatory unit in a dynamically-adaptive winner-take-all network cause it to continually 
adjust its level of activation until the right amount of inhibition is found, regardless of 
the network's initial conditions. As the network cycles and the winner-take-all is being 
performed, the DAWTA regulatory unit's activation inhibits the networks' units, which 
results in feedback to the regulatory unit that causes it to increase its activation if more 
inhibition is required to induce a single winner, or decrease its activation if less is re- 
quire& Accordingly, the DAWTA regulatory unit's activation (aR(t)) now includes its 
previous activation, and is the following: 
I -} netR(t+l) -<-} 
aR(t+l) = aR(t) +  netR(t+l) -} < netR(t+l) < } 
} net R ( t + l ) _> } 
where netR ( t+l ) is the total net input to the regulator at time t+l, and O is a small 
constant (typically 0.05) whose purpose is to stop the regulatory unit's activation from 
rising or failing too rapidly on any given cycle. Figure 3 shows the actual Dynamically- 
Adaptive Winner-Take-All network. As in Figure 2, the regulatory unit is the unit at the 
top and the competing units are the the circular units at the bottom that are inhibited by it 
and which have connections (of weight Ws) to themselves. However, there are now two 
1As in all winner-take-all networks, the competing units may also have inputs from 
outside the network that provide the initial activations driving the competition. 
Dynamically-Adaptive Winner-Take-All Networks 345 
Figure 3. Dynamically-Adaptive Winner-Take-All Netwatk at a hypothelical 
time in the middle of network cycling. Th topmost unit is the DAW'FA 
regulatory unit, whose outgoing coanections to all of the competing units at the 
bottom all have
