92 Cowan and Friedman 
Development and Regeneration of Eye-Brain 
Maps: A Computational Model 
J.D. Cowan and A.E. Friedman 
Department of Mathematics, Committee on 
Neurobiology, and Brain Research Institute, 
The University of Chicago, 5734 S. Univ. Ave., 
Chicago, Illinois 60637 
ABSTRACT 
We outline a computational model of the development and regenera- 
tion of specific eye-brain circuits. The model comprises a self-organiz- 
ing map-forming network which uses local Hebb rules, constrained by 
molecular markers. Various simulations of the development of eye- 
brain maps in fish and frogs are described. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The brain is a biological computer of immense complexity comprising highly specialized 
neurons and neural circuits. Such neurons are interconnected with high specificity in 
many regions of the brain, if not in all. There are also many observations which indicate 
that there is also considerable circuit plasticity. Both specificity and plasticity are found 
in the development and regeneration of eye-brain connections in vertebrates. Sperry 
(1944) first demonstrated specificity in the regeneration of eye-brain connections in frogs 
following optic nerve section and eye rotation; and Gaze and Sharma (1970) and Yoon 
(1972) found evidence for plasticity in the expanded and compressed maps which 
regenerate following eye and brain lesions in goldfish. There are now many experiments 
which indicate that the formation of connections involves both specificity and plasticity. 
Development and Regeneration of Eye-Brain Maps: A Computational Model 93 
1.1 EYE-BRAIN MAPS AND MODELS 
Fig. 1 shows the retinal map found in the optic lobe or tectum of fish and frog. The map 
is topological, i.e.; neighborhood relationships in the retina are preserved in the optic 
tectum. How does such a map develop? Initially there is considerable disorder in the 
1. rtias r. rtias 
1. oldtit r. 
Figure 1: The normal retino-tectal map in fish and frog. Temporal 
retina projects to (contralateral) rostral rectum; nasal retina to 
(contralateral) caudal tectum. 
pathway: retinal ganglion cells make contacts with many widely dispersed tectal neurons. 
However the mature pathway shows a high degree of topological order. How is such an 
organized map achieved? One answer was provided by Prestige & Willshaw (1975): 
retinal axons and tectal neurons are polarized by contact adhesion molecules distributed 
such that axons from one end of the retina are stickier than those from the other end, and 
neurons at one end of the tectum are (correspondingly) stickier than those at the other 
end. Of course this means that isolated retinal axons will all tend to stick to one end of 
the tectum. However if such axons compete with each other for tectal terminal sites (and 
if tectal sites compete for retinal axon terminals), less sticky axons will be displaced, and 
eventually a topological map will form. The Prestige-Willshaw theory explains many ob- 
servations indicating neural specificity. It does not provide for plasticity: the ability of 
retino-tectal systems to adapt to changed target conditions, and vice-versa. Willshaw and 
von der Malsburg (1976, 1977) provided a theory for the plasticity of map 
reorganization, by postulating the synaptic growth in development is Hebbian. Such a 
mechanism provides self-organizing properties in retino-tectal map formation and reor- 
ganization. Whitelaw & Cowan (1981) combined both sticky molecules and Hebbian sy- 
naptic growth to provide a theory which explains both the specificity and plasticity of 
map formation and reorganization in a reasonable fashion. 
There are many experiments, however, which indicate that such theories are too simple. 
Schmidt & Easter (1978) and Meyer (1982) have shown that retinal axons interact with 
94 Cowan and Friedman 
each other in a way which influences map formation. It is our view that there are 
(probably) at least two different types of sticky molecules in the system: those described 
above which mediate retino-tectal interactions, and an additional class which mediates 
axo-axonal interactions in a different way. In what follows we describe a model which 
incorporates such interactions. Some aspects of our model are similar to those introduced 
by Willshaw & yon der Malsburg (1979) and Fraser (1980). Our model can simulate 
almost all experiments in the literature, and provides a way to titrate the relative strenghts 
of intrinsic polarity markers mediating retino-tectal interactions, (postulated) positional 
markers mediating axo-axonal interactions, and stimulus-driven Hebbian synaptic 
changes. 
2 MODELS OF MAP FORMATION AND REGENERATION 
2.1. THE WHITELAW-COWAN MODEL 
Let sij be the strength or weight of the synapse made by the ith retinal axon with the jth 
rectal cell. Then the following differential equation expresses the changes in sij: 
ij = cij (ri' or) tj -  (Nr'l -i + Nt'l -j )(cij (ri' or) tj) (1) 
where N r is the number of retinal ganglion cells and N t the number of tectal neurons, cij 
is the stickiness of the ijth contact, r i denotes retinal activity and tj = :Eisijr i is the corre- 
sponding tectal activity, and ot is a constant measuring the rate of receptor alestabiliza- 
tion (see Whitelaw & Cowan (1981) for details). In addition both retinal and tectal ele- 
ments have fixed lateral inhibitory contacts. The dynamics described by eqn.1 is such 
that both Y_,isij and :Ejsij tend to constant values T and R respectively, where T is the total 
amount of tectal receptor material available per neuron, and R is the total amount of ax- 
onal material available per retinal ganglion cell: thus if sij increases anywhere in the net, 
other synapses made by the ith axon will decrease, as will other synapses on the jth tectal 
neuron. In the current terminology, this process is referred to as winner-take-all. 
For purposes of illustration consider the problem of connecting a line of N r retinal 
ganglion cells to a line of N t rectal cells. The resulting maps can then be represented by 
two-dimensional matrices, in which the area of the square at the ijth intersection 
represents the weight of the synapse between the ith retinal axon and the jth tectal cell. 
The normal retino-tectal map is represented by large squares along the matrix diagonal., 
(see Whitelaw & Cowan (1981) for terminology and further details). It is fairly obvious 
that the only solutions to eqn. (1) lie along the matrix diagonal, or the anti-diagonal, as 
shown in fig. 2. These solutions correspond, respectively, to normal and inverted 
topological maps. It follows that if the affinity cij of the ith retinal ganglion cell for the 
jth tectal neuron is constant, a map will form consisting of normal and inverted local 
patches. To obtain a globally normal map iris necessary to bias the system. One way to 
do this is to suppose that cij = aia j, where a i and aj are respectively, the concentrations 
Development and Regeneration of Eye-Brain Maps: A Computational Model 95 
N t 
1 i N r 1 i N 
Figure 2: Diagonal and anti-diagonal solutions to eqn. 1. Such 
solutions correspond, respectively, to normal and inverted maps. 
of sticky molecules on the tips of retinal axons and on the surfaces of tectal neurons, and 
 is a constant. A good candidate for such a molecule is the recently discovered 
toponymic or TOP molecule found in chick retina and tectum (Trisler & Collins, 1987). 
If a i and aj are distributed in the graded fashion shown in fig. 3, then the system is 
biased in favor of the normally oriented map. 
2 
0 
1 i 1,1 r 
Figure 3: Postulated distribution of sticky molecules in the retina. 
similar distribution is supposed to exist in the tectum. 
A 
2.2 INADEQUACIES 
The Whitelaw-Cowan model simulates the normal development of monocular retinotec- 
tal maps, starting from either diffuse or scrambled initial maps, or from no map. In addi- 
tion it simulates the compressed, expanded, translocated, mismatched and rotated maps 
which have been described in a variety of surgical contexts. However it fails in the 
following respects: a. Although tetrodotoxin (TTX) blocks the refinement of refinotopic 
maps in salamanders, a coarse map can still develop in the absence of retinal activity 
Harris (1980). The model will not simulate this effect. b. Although the model simulates 
the formation of double maps in classical compound eyes {made from a half-left and a 
half right eye} (Gaze, Jacobson, & Szekely, 1963), it fails to account for the 
reprogramming observed in new compound eyes {made by cutting a slit down the 
middle of a tadpole eye} (Hunt & Jacobson, 1974), and fails to simulate the forming of a 
96 Cowan and Friedman 
normal retinotopic map to a compound tectum {made from two posterior halves} 
(Sharma, 1975). 
109 87 65 43 21 109 87 65 43 21 
1 2 34 56 78 910 1 2 34 56 78 910 
r'i' ttctm 
Figure 4: The normal and expanded maps which form after the prior 
expansion of axons from a contralateral half-eye. The two maps are 
actually superposed, but for ease of exposition are shown separately. 
hR reti.u rig reti.u 
12345 54321 
1 2 34 5 6 78 910 
rJ,g' tectv. 
Figure 5: Results of Meyer's experiment. Fibers from the right half- 
retina fail to contact their normal targets and instead make contact with 
available targets, but with reversed polarity. 
c. More significantly, it fails to account for the apparent retinal induction reported by 
Schmidt, Cicerone & Easter (1978) in which following the expansion of retinal axons 
from a goldfish half-eye over an entire (contralateral) tectum, and subsequent sectioning 
of the axons, diverted retinal axons from the other (intact) eye are found to expand over 
the tectum, as if they were also from a half-eye. This has been interpreted to imply that 
the tectum has no intrinsic markers, and that all its markers come from the retina (Chung 
& Cooke, 1978). However Schmidt et.al. also found that the diverted 
