100 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: 
From Unit to System Behavior 
David Servan-Schreiber, Harry Printz and Jonathan D. Cohen 
School of Computer Science and Department of Psychology 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ABSTRACT 
At the level of individual neurons, catecholamine release increases the 
responsivity of cells to excitatory and inhibitory inputs. We present a 
model of catecholamine effects in a network of neural-like elements. 
We argue that changes in the responsivity of individual elements do 
not affect their ability to detect a signal and ignore noise. However, 
the same changes in cell responsivity in a network of such elements do 
improve the signal detection performance of the network as a whole. We 
show how this result can be used in a computer simulation of behavior 
to account for the effect of CNS stimulants on the signal detection 
performance of human subjects. 
1 Introduction 
The catecholaminesmnorepinephrine and dopamine---are neuroactive substances that are 
presumed to modulate information processing in the brain, rather than to convey discrete 
sensory or motor signals. Release of norepinephrine and dopamine occurs over wide 
areas of the central nervous system, and their post-synaptic effects are long lasting. 
These effects consist primarily of an enhancement of the response of target cells to other 
afferent inputs, inhibitory as well as excitatory (see [4] for a review). 
Increases or decreases in catecholaminergic tone have many behavioral consequences 
including effects on motivated behaviors, attention, learning and memory, and motor 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 101 
behavior. At the information processing level, catecholamines appear to affect the ability 
to detect a signal when it is imbedded in noise (see review in [3]). 
In terms of signal detection theory, this is described as a change in the performance of the 
system. However, there is no adequate account of how these changes at the system level 
relate to the effect of catecholamines on individual cells. Several investigators [5,12,2] 
have suggested that catecholamine-mediated increases in a cell's responsivity can be 
interpreted as a change in the cell's signal-to-noise ratio. By analogy, they proposed that 
this change at the unit level may account for changes in signal detection performance at 
the behavioral level. 
In the first part of this paper we analyze the relation between unit responsivity, signal-to- 
noise ratio and signal detection performance in a network of neural elements. We start 
by showing that the changes in unit responsivity induced by catecholamines do not result 
in changes in signal detection performance of a single unit. We then explain how, in 
spite of this fact, the aggregrate effect of such changes in a chain of units can lead to 
improvements in the signal detection performance of the entire network. 
In the second part, we show how changes in gain - which lead to an increase in the 
signal detection performance of the network - can account for a behavioral phenomenon. 
We describe a computer simulation of a network performing a signal detection task that 
has been applied extensively to behavioral research: the continuous performance test. 
In this simulation, increasing the responsivity of individual units leads to improvements 
in performance that closely approximate the improvement observed in human subjects 
under conditions of increased catecholaminergic tone. 
2 Effect of Gain on a Single Element 
We assume that the response of a typical neuron can be described by a strictly increasing 
function fG(x) from real-valued inputs to the interval (0, 1). This function relates the 
strength of a neuron's net afferent input x to its probability of firing, or activation. We 
do not require thatfG is either continuous or differentiable. 
For instance, the family of logistics, given by 
1 + e- 
has been proposed as a model of neural activation functions [7,1]. These functions are 
all strictly increasing, for each value of the gain G > 0, and all values of the bias B. 
The potentiating effect of catecholamines on responsivity can be modelled as a change 
in the shape of its activation function. In the case of the logistic, this is achieved by 
increasing the value of G, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, our analysis applies to 
any suitable family of functions, {fa}. We require only that each member function fa 
is strictly increasing, and that as G  c,c, the family {fa} converges monotonically to 
102 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
l.O 
o.o 
.6.o 
6D 
Input) 
Figure 1: Logistic Activation Function, Used to Model the Response Function of Neurons. Positive 
net inputs correspond to excitatory stimuli, negative net inputs correspond to inhibitory stimuli. 
For the graphs drawn here, we set the bias B to -1. The asymmetry arising from a negative bias 
is often found in the response function of actual neurons [6]. 
the unit step function u0 almost everywhere.  Here, u0 is defined as 
u0(x)={ 0 for x_<0 
1 for x > 0 
This means that as G increases, the value fa(x) gets steadily closer to 1 if x > 0, and 
steadily closer to 0 if x _< 0. 
2.1 Gain Does Not Affect Signal Detection Performance 
Consider the signal detection performance of a network in which the response of a single 
unit is compared with a threshold to determine the presence or absence of a signal. We 
assume that in the presence of the signal, this unit receives a positive (excitatory) net 
afferent input xs, and in the absence of the signal it receives a null or negative (inhibitory) 
input XA. When zero-mean noise is added to this quantity, in the presence as well as the 
absence of the signal, the unit's net input in each case is distributed around Xs or XA 
respectively. Therefore its response is distributed around fa(xs) or fa(XA) respectively 
(see Figure 2). 
In other words, the input in the case where the signal is present is a random variable 
Xs, with probability density function (pdf) Pxs and mean xs, and in the absence of the 
signal it is the random variable XA, with pdf PxA and mean XA. These then determine 
the random variables Yas = fa(Xs) and Yon = fa(Xa), with pdfs Pros and Prc, which 
represent the response in the presence or absence of the signal for a given value of the 
gain. Figure 2 shows examples of Pros and Pr for two different values of G, in the case 
where fa is the biased logistic. 
If the input pdfs PXs and PxA overlap, the output pdfs Pros and Pra will also overlap. 
Thus for any given threshold 0 on the y-axis used to categorize the output as signal 
present or signal absent, there will be some misses and some false alarms. The best 
A sequence of functions {gn} converges almost everywhere to the function g if the set of points where it 
diverges, or converges to the wrong value, is of measure zero. 
The Effect of Catecholamines on Performance: From Unit to System Behavior 103 
O'-06D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
z (Ntt Input) 
-6D -4D -2D OD 2D 4D 6D 
x (Ntt Input) 
Figure 2: Input and Output Probability Density Functions. The curves at the bottom are the pdfs 
of the net input in the signal absent (left) and signal present (right) cases. The curves along the 
y-axis are the response pdfs for each case; they are functions of the activation y, and represent the 
distribution of outputs. The top graph shows the logistic and response pdfs for G = 0.5, B = -1; 
the bottom graph shows them for G = 1.0, B = -1. 
the system can do is to select a threshold that optimizes performance. More precisely, 
the expected payoff or performance of the unit is given by 
E(O) =  + ct . Pr(Ys _> O) - fl. Pr(Yaa >_ O) 
where A, ct, and 3 are constants that together reflect the prior probability of the signal, 
and the payoffs associated with correct detections or hits, correct ignores, false alarms 
and misses. Note that Pr(YGs > O) and Pr(YGA _> O) are the probabilities of a hit and a 
false alarm, respectively. 
By solving the equation dE/dO = 0 we can determine the value 0* that maximizes E. We 
call 0* the optimal threshold. Our first result is that for any activation function f that 
satisfies our assumptions, and any fixed input pclfs Pxs and PxA the unit's performance at 
optimal threshold is the same. We call this the Constant Optimal Performance Theorem, 
which is stated and proved in [10]. In particular, for the logistic, increasing the gain 
G does not induce better performance. It may change the value of the threshold that 
yields optimal performance, but it does not change the actual performance at optimum. 
This is because a strictly increasing activation function produces a point-to-point mapping 
between the distributions of input and output values. Since the amount of overlap between 
104 Servan-Schreiber, Printz and Cohen 
the two input pdfs Pxs and PxA does not change as the gain varies, the amount of overlap 
in the response pdfs does not change either, even though the shape of the response pdfs 
does change when gain increases (see Figure 2). 2 
3 Effect of Gain on a Chain of Elements 
Although increasing the gain does not affect the signal detection performance of a single 
element, it does improve the performance of a chain of such elements. By a chain, we 
mean an arrangement in which the output of the first unit provides the input to another 
unit (see Figure 3). Let us call this second element the response unit. We monitor the 
output of this second unit to determine the presence or absence of a signal. 
x 
Input Unit Response Unit 
Figure 3: A Chain of Units. The output of the unit receiving the signal is combined with noise 
to provide input to a second unit, called the response unit. The activation of the response unit is 
compared to a threshold to determine the presence or absence of the signal. 
As in the previous discussion, noise is added to the net input t
