An Analog VLSI Model of 
Periodicity Extraction 
Andr6 van Schaik 
Computer Engineering Laboratory 
J03, University of Sydney, NSW 2006 
Sydney, Australia 
andrenee. usyd. edu.au 
Abstract 
This paper presents an electronic system that extracts the 
periodicity of a sound. It uses three analogue VLSI building 
blocks: a silicon cochlea, two inner-hair-cell circuits and two 
spiking neuron chips. The silicon cochlea consists of a cascade of 
filters. Because of the delay between two outputs from the silicon 
cochlea, spike trains created at these outputs are synchronous only 
for a narrow range of periodicities. In contrast to traditional band- 
pass filters, where an increase in' selectivity has to be traded off 
against a decrease in response time, the proposed system responds 
quickly, independent of selectivity. 
I Introduction 
The human ear transduces airborne sounds into a neural signal using three stages in 
the inner ear's cochlea: (i) the mechanical filtering of the Basilar Membrane (BM), 
(ii) the transduction of membrane vibration into neurotransmitter release by the 
Inner Hair Cells (IHCs), and (iii) spike generation by the Spiral Ganglion Cells 
(SGCs), whose axons form the auditory nerve. The properties of the BM are such 
that close to the entrance of the cochlea (the base) the BM is most sensitive to high 
frequencies and at the apex the BM responds best to low frequencies. Along the BM 
the best-frequency decreases in an exponential manner with distance along the 
membrane. For frequencies below a given point's best-frequency the response drops 
off gradually, but for frequencies above the best-frequency the response drops off 
rapidly (see Fig. lb for examples of such frequency-gain functions). 
An Inner Hair Cell senses the local vibration of a section of the Basilar Membrane. 
The intracellular voltage of an IHC resembles a half-wave-rectified version of the 
local BM vibration, low-pass filtered at 1 kHz. The IHC voltage has therefore lost 
it's AC component almost completely for frequencies above about 4 kHz. Well 
below this frequency, however, the IHC voltage has a clear temporal structure, 
which will be reflected in the spike trains on the auditory nerve. 
These spike trains are generated by the spiral ganglion cells. These SGCs spike with 
a probability roughly proportional to the instantaneous inner hair cell voltage. 
Therefore, for the lower sound frequencies, the spectrum of the input waveform is 
not only encoded in the form of an average spiking rate of different fibers along the 
An Analog VLSI Model of Periodicity Extraction 739 
cochlea (place coding), but also in the periodicity of spiking of the individual 
auditory nerve fibers. It has been shown that this periodicity information is a much 
more robust cue than the spatial distribution of average firing rates [1]. Some 
periodicity information can already be detected at intensities 20 dB below the 
intensity needed to obtain a change in average rate. Periodicity information is 
retained at intensities in the range of 60-90 dB SPL, for which the average rate of 
the majority of the auditory nerve fibers is saturated. Moreover, the positions of the 
fibers responding best to a given frequency move with changing sound intensity, 
whereas the periodicity information remains constant. Furthermore, the frequency 
selectivity of a given fiber's spiking rate is drastically reduced at medium and high 
sound intensities. The robustness of periodicity information makes it likely that the 
brain actually uses this information. 
2 Modelling periodicity extraction 
Several models have been proposed that extract periodicity information using the 
phase encoding of fibers connected to the same inner hair cell or that use the 
synchronicity of firing on auditory nerve fibers connected to different inner hair 
cells (see [2] for 4 examples of these models). The simplest of the phase encoding 
schemes correlate the output of the cochlea at a given position with a delayed 
version of itself. It is easy to see that for pure tones, the comparison sin(2 x f t) = 
sin(2  f(t - A)) is only true for frequencies that are a multiple of I/A, i.e., for these 
frequencies the signals are in perfect synchrony and thus perfectly correlated. We 
can adapt the delay A to each cochlear output, so that 1/A equals the best frequency 
of that cochlear output. In this case higher multiples of 1/A will be suppressed due 
to the very steep cut-off of the cochlear filters for frequencies above the best 
frequency. Each synchronicity detector will then only be sensitive to the best 
frequency of the filter to which it is connected. If we code the direct signal and the 
delayed signal with two spike trains, with one spike per period at a fixed phase 
each, it becomes a very simple operation to detect the synchronicity. A simple 
digital AND operator will be enough to detect overlap between two spikes. These 
spikes will overlap perfectly when f= I/A, but some overlap will still be present for 
frequencies close to l/A, since the spikes have a finite width. The bandwidth of the 
AND output can thus be controlled by the spike width. 
It is possible to create a silicon implementation of this scheme using an artificial 
cochlea, an IHC circuit, and a spiking neuron circuit together with additional 
circuits to create the delays. A chip along these lines has been developed by John 
Lazzaro [3] and functioned correctly. A disadvantage of this scheme, however, is 
the fact that the delay associated with a cochlear output has to be matched to the 
inverse of the best frequency of that cochlear output. For a cochlea whose best 
frequency changes exponentially with filter number in the cascade from 4 kHz (the 
upper range of phase locking on the auditory nerve) to 100 Hz, we will have to 
create delays that range from 0.25 ms to 10 ms. In the brain, such a large variation 
in delays is unlikely to be provided by an axonal delay circuit because it would 
require an excessively large variation in axon length. 
A possible solution comes from the observation that the phase of a pure tone of a 
given frequency on the basilar membrane increases from base to apex, and the phase 
changes rapidly around the best frequency. The silicon cochlea, which is 
implemented with a cascade of second-order low-pass filters (Fig. l a), also 
functions as a delay line, and each filter adds a delay which corresponds to x/2 at 
the cut-off frequency of that filter. If we assume that filter i and filter i-4 have the 
same cut-off frequency (which is not the case), the delay between the output of both 
filters will correspond to a full period (2x) at the cut-off frequency. 
740 A. v. Schaik 
0.01 
0 
phase 
(rad) 
-0.5 
o.1 normalized frequency lO lOO 
Silicon Cochlea 
Neurons 
I AND I 
Low CF 
d) 
Figure 1: a) Part of a silicon cochlea. Each section contains a second-order 
low-pass filter and a derivator; b) accumulated gain at output i and i-4; c) 
phase curves of the individual stages between output i and output i-4; d) 
proposed implementation of the periodicity extraction model. 
In reality, the filters along the cochlea will have different cut-off frequencies, as 
shown in Fig. 1. Here we show the accumulated gain at the outputs i and i-4 (Fig. 
lb), and the delay added by each individual filter between these two outputs (Fig. 
1 c) as a function of frequency (normalized to the cut-off frequency of filter i). The 
solid vertical line represents this cut-off frequency, and we can see that only filter i 
adds a delay of x/2, and the other filters add less. However, if we move the vertical 
line to the right (indicated by the dotted vertical line), the delay added by each filter 
will increase relatively quickly, and at some frequency slightly higher than the cut- 
off frequency of filter i, the sum of the delays will become 2x (dashed line). At this 
frequency neither filter i nor filter i-4 has maximum gain, but if the cut-off 
frequency of both filters is not too different, the gain will still be high enough for 
both filters at the correlator frequency to yield output signals with reasonable 
amplitudes. 
The improved model can be implemented using building blocks as shown in Fig. 1 d. 
Each of these building blocks have previously been presented (refer to [4] for 
additional details). The silicon cochlea is used to filter and delay the signal, and has 
been adjusted so that the cut-off frequency decreases by one octave every twenty 
stages, so that the cut-off frequencies of neighboring filters are almost equal. The 
IHC circuit half-wave rectifies the signal in the implementation of Figure l d. The 
low-pass filtering of the biological Inner Hair Cell can be ignored for frequencies 
below the approximately l kHz cut-off frequency of the cell. Since we limited our 
measurements to this range, the low-pass filtering has not been modeled by the 
circuit. Two chips containing electronic leaky-integrate-and-fire neurons have been 
used to create the two spike trains. In the first series of measurements, each chip 
generates exactly one spike per period of the input signal. A final test will set the 32 
neurons on each chip to behave more like biological spiral ganglion cells and the 
effect on periodicity extraction will be shown. A digital AND gate is used to 
compare the output spikes of the two chips, and the spike rate at the output of the 
AND gate is the measure of activity used. 
3 Test results 
The first experiment measures the number of spikes per second at the output of the 
AND gate as a function of input frequency, using different cochlear filter 
combinations. Twelve filter pairs have been measured, each combining a filter 
An Analog VLSI Model of Periodicity Extraction 741 
output with the output of a filter four sections earlier in the cascade. The best 
frequency of the filter with the lowest best frequency of the pairs ranged from 
200 Hz to 880 Hz. The results are shown in F
