Using Feedforward Neural Networks to 
Monitor Alertness from Changes in EEG 
Correlation and Coherence 
Scott Makeig 
Naval Health Research Center, P.O. Box 85122 
San Diego, CA 92186-5122 
Tzyy-Ping Jung 
Naval Health Research Center and 
Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and 
Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
Abstract 
We report here that changes in the normalized electroencephalo- 
graphic (EEG) cross-spectrum can be used in conjunction with 
feedforward neural networks to monitor changes in alertness of op- 
erators continuously and in near-real time. Previously, we have 
shown that EEG spectral amplitudes covary with changes in alert- 
ness as indexed by changes in behavioral error rate on an auditory 
detection task [6, 4]. Here, we report for the first time that increases 
in the frequency of detection errors in this task are also accompa- 
nied by patterns of increased and decreased spectral coherence in 
several frequency bands and EEG channel pairs. Relationships 
between EEG coherence and performance vary between subjects, 
but within subjects, their topographic and spectral profiles appear 
stable from session to session. Changes in alertness also covary 
with changes in correlations among EEG waveforms recorded at 
different scalp sites, and neural networks can also estimate alert- 
ness from correlation changes in spontaneous and unobtrusively- 
recorded EEG signals. 
I Introduction 
When humans become drowsy, EEG scalp recordings of potential oscillations change 
dramatically in frequency, amplitude, and topographic distribution [3]. These 
changes are complex and differ between subjects [10]. Recently, we have shown 
932 S. MAKEIG, T.-P. JUNG, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
that using principal components analysis in conjunction with feedforward neural 
networks, minute-scale changes in performance on a sustained auditory detection 
task can be estimated in near real-time from changes in the EEG spectrum at one 
or more scalp channels [4, 6]. Here, we report, first, that loss of alertness during 
auditory detection task performance is also accompanied by changes in spectral co- 
herence of EEG signals recorded at different scalp sites. The extent, topography, 
and frequency content of coherence changes linked to changes in alertness differ 
between subjects, but within subjects they appear stable from session to session. 
Second, since most coherence changes linked to alertness are not associated with 
significant phase differences, moving correlation measures applied to wideband or 
bandlimited EEG waveforms also covary with changes in alertness. Incorporat- 
ing coherence and/or correlation information into neural network algorithms for 
estimating alertness from the EEG spectrum should enhance their accuracy and ro- 
bustness and contribute to the design of practical neural human-system interfaces 
performing real-time monitoring of changes in operator alertness. 
2 Methods 
Concurrent EEG and behavioral data were collected for the purpose of developing a 
method of objectively monitoring the alertness of operators of complex systems [6]. 
Ten adult volunteers participated in three or more half-hour sessions during which 
they pushed one button whenever they detected an above-threshold auditory target 
stimulus (a brief increase in the level of the continuously-present background noise). 
To maximize the chance of observing alertness decrements, sessions were conducted 
in a small, warm, and dimly-lit experimental chamber, and subjects were instructed 
to keep their eyes closed. 
Targets were 350 ms increases in the intensity of a 62 dB white noise background, 
6 dB above their threshold of detectability, presented at random time intervals at a 
mean rate of 10/min. Short, and task-irrelevant probe tones of two frequencies (568 
and 1098 Hz) were interspersed between the target noise bursts at 2-4 s intervals. 
EEG was collected from thirteen electrodes located at sites of the Internation 10-20 
System, referred to the right mastoid, at a sampling rate of 312.5 Hz. A bipolar 
diagonal electrooculogram (EOG) channel was also recorded for use in eye movement 
artifact correction and rejection. Two sessions each from three of the subjects were 
chosen for analysis on the basis of their including more than 50 detection lapses. 
A continuous performance measure, local error rate, was computed by convolving 
an irregularly-spaced performance index (hit=0/lapse=l) with a 95 s smoothing 
window advanced through the performance data in 1.64 s steps. Target hits were 
defined as targets responded to within a 100-3000 ms window; other targets were 
called lapses. After eye movement artifacts were removed from the data using a 
selective regression procedure [5], and data containing other large artifacts were 
rejected from analysis, complex EEG spectra were computed by advancing a 512- 
point (1.64 s) data window through the data in 0.41 s steps, multiplying by a 
Hanning window, and converting to frequency domain using an FFT. 
Complex coherence was then computed for each channel pair in 1.64 s spectral 
epochs. In the coherence studies, error rate was smoothed with a bell-shaped Pa- 
poulis window; a 36 s rectangular window was used to smooth the coherence esti- 
mates. Finally, complex coherence was converted to coherence amplitude and phase 
and results were correlated with local error rate. A moving correlation measure be- 
tween (1-20 Hz) bandlimited EEG waveforms was computed for each channel pair 
in a moving 1.64 s smoothing window, and then smoothed using a causal 95-s ex- 
ponential window. The same window was used to smooth the error rate time series 
for the correlation studies. 
Using Feedforward Neural Networks to Monitor Alertness from EEG 933 
3 Results 
0.6 
0.4 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
0 
9,   20 
Frequency: 9.1 Hz  t  10 
...............  ...................... fibi p3'9 ........ 1 0 
 [  Expno 8  -10 
5 10 15 20 25 
Ti  Tk () 
Subject p37 [ 20 degree phase = 3.6 ms lag 
 ' ey' 15 25 Hz 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 
Time on Task {rain) 
(b) 
Figure 1: (a) Changes in coherence amplitude at 9.1 Hz (upper traces) are correlated 
with simultaneous changes in error rate during a half auditory detection task (lower 
trace) in nine indicated central-frontal channel pairs. (b) Concurrent changes in 
coherence phase at 15.25 Hz (upper traces) and local error rate (lower trace) for the 
same session and channel-pairs. 
3.1 Relation of Coherence Changes to Detection Performance. 
During the first 2-3 minutes of the session shown in Fig. la, the subject detected 
all targets presented, and coherence amplitudes remained high (0.9). In minutes 
8-10, however, when the subject failed to make a single detection response(lower 
trace), coherence amplitude fell to as low as 0.6. Overall correlations for this session 
between the coherence and error rate time series in these channel pairs ranged from 
-0.590 to -0.776. 
In the same session, coherence phase at 15 Itz also covaried with performance 
(Fig. lb). During low-error portions of the session, there was no detectable co- 
herence phase lag at 15 Itz within the same nine channel pairs, whereas while the 
subject performed poorly, a 20 degree phase lag appeared during which 15 Itz ac- 
tivity at frontal sites lead activity at frontal sites by 3 ms. Overall correlations for 
this session between coherence phase and error rate for these channel pairs ranged 
from 0.416 to 0.689. Correlations between coherence amplitude and error rate at 
80 EEG frequencies (Fig. 2a, upper traces) included two broad bands of strong neg- 
ative correlations (3-12 Itz and 15-20 Itz), while appreciable correlations between 
coherence phase and performance were confined to much narrower frequency bands 
(lower traces). 
To estimate the significance of these coherence correlations, surrogate moving coher- 
ence records were collected 10 times using randomly-selected, asynchronous blocks 
of contiguous EEG data for each channel. Correlations between the resulting surro- 
gate moving coherence time series and error rate were computed, and the 99.936th 
percentile of the distribution of (absolute) correlations was determined. For the 
subject whose data is shown here, this value was 0.485. Under conservative as- 
sumptions of complete independence of adjacent frequencies, this should give the 
(p=0.05) significance level for the maximum absolute correlation in each 80-bin 
correlation spectrum. (The heuristic estimate of this significance level from the 
surrogate data was 0.435). In the two sessions from this subject, however, more 
than 20% of all the 78 channel-pair coherence correlations were larger in absolute 
value than 0.485, implying that coherence amplitude changes at many scalp sites 
and frequencies are significantly related to changes in alertness in this subject. 
934 S. MAKEIG, T.-P. JUNG, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
3.2 Spectral and Topographic Stability 
Subjcct p37 Channel-pair Cl. ustcrs 
2 Sessions /' 
0 5 !0 15 20 25 
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz) 
3O 
(a) (b) 
Figure 2: (a) Correlation spectra showing correlations between moving-average co- 
herence and error rate for the same session and channel-pairs. Small letters 'a,b,c' 
indicate the frequencies analyzed in Figs. I and 3. (b) Cluster analysis of correla- 
tions between coherence amplitude and error rate at 41 frequencies (0.6 Hz to 25 
Hz). Means of six sets of channel pairs derived from cluster analysis of 78 similar 
coherence correlation spectra from all pairs of 13 scalp channels; superimposed on 
the same means for a second session from the same subject. 
The sign, size, and spectral and topographic structure of correlations between co- 
herence amplitude and error rate at each frequency were stable across two sessions 
for most chan
