Independent Component Analysis 
of Electroencephalographic Data 
Scott Makeig 
Naval Health Research Center 
P.O. Box 85122 
San Diego CA 92186-5122 
scott cplmumag. nhrc. navy. mil 
Anthony J. Bell 
Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
tonysalk. edu 
Tzyy-Ping Jung 
Naval Health Research Center and 
Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
jungsalk. edu 
Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and 
Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
errysalk. edu 
Abstract 
Because of the distance between the skull and brain and their differ- 
ent resistivities, electroencephalographic (EEG) data collected from 
any point on the human scalp includes activity generated within 
a large brain area. This spatial smearing of EEG data by volume 
conduction does not involve significant time delays, however, sug- 
gesting that the Independent Component Analysis (ICA) algorithm 
of Bell and Sejnowski [1] is suitable for performing blind source sep- 
aration on EEG data. The ICA algorithm separates the problem of 
source identification from that of source localization. First results 
of applying the ICA algorithm to EEG and event-related potential 
(ERP) data collected during a sustained auditory detection task 
show: (1) ICA training is insensitive to different random seeds. (2) 
ICA may be used to segregate obvious artifactual EEG components 
(line and muscle noise, eye movements) from other sources. (3) ICA 
is capable of isolating overlapping EEG phenomena, including al- 
pha and theta bursts and spatially-separable ERP components, to 
separate ICA channels. (4) Nonstationarities in EEG and behav- 
ioral state can be tracked using ICA via changes in the amount of 
residual correlation between ICA-filtered output channels. 
146 S. MAKEIG, A. J. BELL, T.-P. JUNG, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
I Introduction 
1.1 Separating What from Where in EEG Source Analysis 
The joint problems of EEG source segregation, identification, and localization are 
very difficult, since the problem of determining brain electrical sources from po- 
tential patterns recorded on the scalp surface is mathematically underdetermined. 
lecent efforts to identify EEG sources have focused mostly on performing spatial 
segregation and localization of source activity [4]. By applying the ICA algorithm 
of Bell and Sejnowski [1], we attempt to completely separate the twin problems of 
source identification (What) and source localization (Where). The ICA algorithm 
derives independent sources from highly correlated EEG signals statistically and 
without regard to the physical location or configuration of the source generators. 
lather than modeling the EEG as a unitary output of a multidimensional dynami- 
cal system, or as the roar of the crowd of independent microscopic generators, we 
suppose that the EEG is the output of a number of statistically independent but 
spatially fixed potentiM-generating systems which may either be spatiMly restricted 
or widely distributed. 
1.2 Independent Component Analysis 
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [1, 3] is the name given to techniques for 
finding a matrix, W and a vector, w, so that the elements, u = [u...uN] r, of 
the linear transform u = Wx + w of the random vector, x = [xl ... xv] T, are sta- 
tistically independent. In contrast with decorrelation techniques such as Principal 
Components Analysis (PCA) which ensure that {uiujl = O,Vij, ICA imposes the 
much stronger criterion that the multivariate probability density function (p.d.f.) 
of u factorizes: fu(u) = I-I= f,.(ui). Finding such a factorization involves mak- 
ing the mutual information between the ui go to zero: I(ui, uj) = O, Vij. Mutual 
information is a measure which depends on all higher-order statistics of the ui while 
decorrelation only takes account of 2nd-order statistics. 
In [1], a new algorithm was proposed for carrying out ICA. The only prior assump- 
tion is that the unknown independent components, ui, each have the same form of 
cumulative density function (c.d.f.) after scaling and shifting, and that we know this 
form, call it F,(u). ICA can then be performed by maximizing the entropy, H(y), 
of a non-linearly transformed vector: y = F(u). This yields stochastic gradient 
ascent rules for adjusting W and w: 
zxw [wr] + xr, ZXw 
(1) 
where r - [1 ... N] T, the elements of which are: 
cO cOyi [which if y -- F,(u)] cOA(ui) 
i = r2yi cOui = cOF,(ui) (2) 
It can be shown that an ICA solution is a stable point of the relaxation of eqs.(1-2). 
In practical tests on separating mixed speech signals, good results were found when 
using the logistic function, Yi = (1 + e-') -x, instead of the known c.d.f., F, of 
the speech signals. In this case i = I - 2yi, and the algorithm has a simple form. 
These results were obtained despite the fact that the p.d.f. of the speech signals was 
not exactly matched by the gradient of the logistic function. In the experiments in 
this paper, we also used the speedup technique of prewhitening described in [2]. 
Independent Component Analysis of Electroencephalographic Data 14 7 
1.3 Applying ICA to EEG Data 
The ICA technique appears ideally suited for performing source separation in do- 
mains where, (1) the sources are independent, (2) the propagation delays of the 
'mixing medium' are negligible, (3) the sources are analog and have p.d.f.'s not too 
unlike the gradient of a logistic sigmoid, and (4) the number of independent signal 
sources is the same as the number of sensors, meaning if we employ N sensors, 
using the ICA algorithm we can separate N sources. In the case of EEG signals, 
N scalp electrodes pick up correlated signals and we would like to know what ef- 
fectively 'independent brain sources' generated these mixtures. If we assume that 
the complexity of EEG dynamics can be modeled, at least in part, as a collection 
of a modest number of statistically independent brain processes, the EEG source 
analysis problem satisfies ICA assumption (1). Since volume conduction in brain 
tissue is effectively instantaneous, ICA assumption (2) is also satisfied. Assumption 
(3) is plausible, but assumption (4), that the EEG is a linear mixtures of exactly N 
sources, is questionable, since we do not know the effective number of statistically 
independent brain signals contributing to the EEG recorded from the scalp. The 
foremost problem in interpreting the output of ICA is, therefore, determining the 
proper dimension of input channels, and the physiological and/or psychophysiolog- 
ical significance of the derived ICA source channels. 
Although the ICA model of the EEG ignores the known variable synchronization of 
separate EEG generators by common subcortical or corticocortical influences [5], it 
appears promising for identifying concurrent signal sources that are either situated 
too close together, or are too widely distributed to be separated by current localiza- 
tion techniques. Here, we report a first application of the ICA algorithm to analysis 
of 14-channel EEG and ERP recordings during sustained eyes-closed performance 
of an auditory detection task, and give evidence suggesting that the ICA algorithm 
may be useful for identifying psychophysiological state transitions. 
2 Methods 
EEG and behavioral data were collected to develop a method of objectively moni- 
toring the alertness of operators of complex systems [8]. Ten adult volunteers par- 
ticipated in three or more half-hour sessions, during which they pushed one button 
whenever they detected an above-threshold auditory target stimulus (a brief in- 
crease in the level of the continuously-present background noise). To maximize the 
chance of observing alertness decrements, sessions were conducted in a small, warm, 
and dimly-lit experimental chamber, and subjects were instructed to keep their eyes 
closed. Auditory targets were 350 ms increases in the intensity of a 62 dB white 
noise background, 6 dB above their threshold of detectability, presented at random 
time intervals at a mean rate of 10/min, and superimposed on a continuous 39-Hz 
click train evoking a 39-Hz steady-state response (SSR). Short, and task-irrelevant 
probe tones of two frequencies (568 and 1098 Hz) were interspersed between the 
target noise bursts at 2-4 s intervals. EEG was collected from thirteen electrodes 
located at sites of the International 10-20 System, referred to the right mastoid, at 
a sampling rate of 312.5 Hz. A bipolar diagonal electrooculogram (EOG) channel 
was also recorded for use in eye movement artifact correction and rejection. Tar- 
get Hits were defined as targets responded to within a 100-3000 ms window, while 
Lapses were targets not responded to. Two sessions each from three of the subjects 
were selected for analysis based on their containing at least 50 response Lapses. 
A continuous performance measure, local error rate, was computed by convolving 
the irregularly-sampled performance index time series (Hit=O/Lapse=l) with a 95 
s smoothing window advanced for 1.64 s steps. 
148 S. MAKEIG, A. J. BELL, T.-P. JUNG, T. J. SEJNOWSKI 
The ICA algorithm in eqs.(1-2) was applied to the 14 EEG recordings. The time 
index was permuted to ensure signal stationarity, and the 14-dimensional time point 
vectors were presented to a 14 - 14 ICA network one at a time. To speed conver- 
gence, we first pre-whitened the data to remove first- and second-order statistics. 
The learning rate was annealed from 0.03 to 0.0001 during convergence. After each 
pass through the whole training set, we checked the amount of correlation between 
the ICA output channels and the amount of change in weight matrix, and stopped 
the training procedure when, (1) the mean correlation among all channel pairs was 
below 0.05, and (2) the ICA weights had stopped changing appreciably
