Catastrophic Interference in Human 
Motor Learning 
Tom Brashers-Krug, Reza Shadmehrt, and Emanuel Todorov 
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, M. I. T., Cambridge, MA 02139 
tCurrently at Dept. of Biomedical Eng., Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD 21205 
Email: tbk@ai.mit.edu, reza@bme.jhu.edu, emo@ai.mit.edu 
Abstract 
Biological sensorimotor systems are not static maps that transform 
input (sensory information) into output (motor behavior). Evi- 
dence from many lines of research suggests that their representa- 
tions are plastic, experience-dependent entities. While this plastic- 
ity is essential for flexible behavior, it presents the nervous system 
with dimcult organizational challenges. If the sensorimotor system 
adapts itself to perform well under one set of circumstances, will it 
then perform poorly when placed in an environment with different 
demands (negative transfer)? Will a later experience-dependent 
change undo the benefits of previous learning (catastrophic inter- 
ference)? We explore the first question in a separate paper in this 
volume (Shadmehr et al. 1995). Here we present psychophysical 
and computational results that explore the question of catastrophic 
interference in the context of a dynamic motor learning task. Un- 
der some conditions, subjects show evidence of catastrophic inter- 
ference. Under other conditions, however, subjects appear to be 
immune to its effects. These results suggest that motor learning 
can undergo a process of consolidation. Modular neural networks 
are well suited for the demands of learning multiple input/output 
mappings. By incorporating the notion of fast- and slow-changing 
connections into a modular architecture, we were able to account 
for the psychophysical results. 
20 Tom Brashers-Krug, Reza Shadmehr, Emanuel Todorov 
I Introduction 
Interacting physically with the world changes the dynamics of one's limbs. For 
example, when holding a heavy load, a different pattern of muscular activity is 
needed to move one's arm along a particular path than when not holding a load. 
Previous work in our laboratory has shown that humans learn a novel dynamic 
task by forming an internal model of the new inverse dynamics of thier limbs. 
(Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi 1994, Shadmehr et al, 1995). Preliminary evidence 
suggests that subjects can retain one of these internal models over time (Brashers- 
Krug, et al. 1994). Humans are required, however, to move their limbs effectively 
under a large number of dynamic conditions. Are people able to learn and store 
an inverse dynamic model appropriate for each condition, or do they form such 
models from scratch as they need them? In particular, can learning a new inverse 
dynamic model overwrite or displace a previous model? We will present evidence 
that certain conditions must be met before a subject is able to retain more than 
one inverse dynamic model in a given experimental context. These conditions can 
be modeled as leading to a process of consolidation, whereby learning is transfeted 
from vulnerable, low-capacity storage to a long-term, high-capacity storage. 
2 Experimental Protocol 
We have developed a motor learning paradigm that allows us to alter the dynamics 
of a subject's arm and so to monitor a subject's ability to learn dynamic tasks. 
A subject moves the handle on the free end of a two-link planar robot arm-called 
a manipulandum-to guide a cursor to a series of targets displayed on a computer 
screen (fig la). The position and velocity of the handle of the manipulandum are 
recorded at ten-millisecond intervals and are used to deliver state-dependent forces 
to the subject's hand. In order to test a subject's ability to learn a novel dynamic 
task, we present the subject with a viscous force field as s/he moves from one 
target to the next (fig lb). Initially, such forces perturb the subject's movements, 
causing them to depart from the smooth, straight-line trajectories of the baseline 
condition (i.e., the condition before the viscous forces were presented) (figs lc,ld). 
The extent of learning is measured as the degree to which a subject's movements 
in the force field over time come to resemble that subject's baseline movements. 
We have shown in previous work that subjects adapt to the imposed force fileds by 
forming a predictive model of the velocity-dependent forces, and that subjects use 
this inverse dynamic model to control their arms in what appears to be a feedforward 
manner (Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi 1994). 
3 Psychophysical Findings 
3.1 Catastrophic Interference 
Here, we employed this paradigm to explore the consequences of learning two dif- 
ferent dynamic tasks in a row. In an initial series of experiments, we allowed twelve 
subjects to learn to move the manipulandum in a first force field (Field A) for ap- 
proximately 5 minutes. Immediately after this first set of movements, we presented 
the subjects with an anti-correlated force field (Field B). For example, if we pre- 
Catastrophic Interference in Hutnan Motor Learning 21 
B 
C D 
Figure 1: A: The experimental setup. B: An example of a viscous field, plotted in velocity 
space (mm/sec). The arrows indicate the direction and magnitude of the forces exerted 
by the manipulandum on the subject's hand at each location in velocity space. C: One 
subject's trajectories before forces were introduced. Targets are indicated by the open 
circles. D: Trajectories immediately after the force field in (B) was presented. 
sented the counter-clockwise curl field depicted in fig. lB as Field A, we would next 
present a clockwise curl field as Field B. Half the subjects learned the clockwise curl 
field first and the counter-clockwise field second; the other half learned the two fields 
in the reverse order. (The first field will be referred to as Field A and the second 
field as Field B, whichever field was learned first.) The subjects' mean performance 
in Field B was worse (p< 0.0001, paired t-test) than in Field A. This phenomenon 
has been called negative transfer in the psychophysical literature. Negative transfer 
in this motor learning paradigm is explored more fully in a separate paper in this 
volume (Shadmehr et al, 1995). In that paper, we suggested that this negative 
transfer could result from the fact that the same neural elements are learning both 
tasks. We predicted that, if this is the case, learning to move in Field B would 
interfere with a subject's ability to retain an inverse dynamic model of Field A. 
Learning to move in Field B would, in effect, cause subjects to unlearn Field A, 
resulting in catastrophic interference. 
In order to test this prediction, we compared the improvement in performance from 
one day to the next of two groups of subjects, with twelve subjects in each group. 
The subjects in the control group learned to move in one force field on Day One 
and were then tested on Day Two in the same force field. The subjects in the 
experimental group learned two separate force fields in a row on Day One and were 
then tested on Day Two in the first force field they learned. The experimental 
group retained significantly less of their learning (p< 0.01, paired t-test) from Day 
One to Day Two than the control group (figs 2a,2b). In other words, learning the 
second force field resulted in catastrophic interference. (The question of whether 
this represents a storage or a retrieval phenomenon is beyond the scope of this 
paper.) 
22 Tom Brashers-Krug, Reza Shadmehr, Emanuel Todorov 
3.2 Consolidation 
Having found evidence for catastrophic interference, we wanted to know whether 
there were circumstances under which dynamic motor learning was immune to being 
functionally erased by subsequent learning. We therefore tested two further groups 
of subjects. We allowed these subjects to practice longer in one field before they 
learned the second field. We also allowed 24 hours to pass between the time subjects 
first learned one field and when they learned the second field. The subjects in 
the experimental group (n - 10) practiced in one force field for approximately 15 
minutes on Day One. They returned on Day Two and practiced in the same force 
field for five more minutes. They were then allowed to practice in a second force 
field for 15 minutes. By the end of this fifteen minutes, they were performing in the 
second field at a level comparable to the level they acheived in the first force field. 
We had the subjects return on Day Three, when they were tested for their retention 
of the first field they learned. We compared the difference in performance on Day 
Two and Day Three of this experimental group with that of a control group (n = 
9) who followed the same protocol in all respects except that they never learned a 
second force field. In this way we could determine whether learning the second field 
resulted in a decrement in performance for the experimental group when compared 
with the control group. 
Under these conditions, we found no difference in the retention of learning between 
the experimental and control groups (fig 2c, 2d). That is, learning the second 
field under these conditions no longer resulted in catastrophic interference. What 
subjects had learned about the first field had become resistant to such interference. 
It had become consolidated. 
We can not tell from these experiments whether such consolidation is the result of 
the increased practice in the first field, or whether it is the result of the 24 hours 
that elapsed between when the first field was first learned and when the second field 
was learned. There is evidence that increased practice in a motor task can engage 
different neural circuits than those that are active during initial learning (Jenkins, 
et al 1994). The shift to practiced circuits may represent the neural substrate of 
consolidation. There is also evidence that time can be an important factor in the 
consolidation of skill learning. (
