Independent Component Analysis of 
Intracellular Calcium Spike Data 
Klaus Prank, Julia Brger, Alexander von zur Miihlen, 
Georg Brabant, Christof Schfl 
Department of Clinical Endocrinology 
Medical School Hannover 
D-30625 Hannover 
Germany 
Abstract 
Calcium (Ca'+)is an ubiquitous intracellular messenger which reg- 
ulates cellular processes, such as secretion, contraction, and cell 
proliferation. A number of different cell types respond to hormonal 
stimuli with periodic oscillations of the intracellular free calcium 
concentration ([Ca'+]i). These Ca '+ signals are often organized 
in complex temporal and spatial patterns even under conditions 
of sustained stimulation. Here we study the spario-temporal as- 
pects of intracellular calcium ([Ca'+]i) oscillations in clonal 3-cells 
(hamster insulin secreting cells, HIT) under pharmacological stim- 
ulation (SchSfl et al., 1996). We use a novel fast fixed-point al- 
gorithm (Hyv/irinen and Oja, 1997) for Independent Component 
Analysis (ICA) to blind source separation of the spario-temporal 
dynamics of [Ca'+]i in a HIT-cell. Using this approach we find two 
significant independent components out of five differently mixed in- 
put signals: one [Ca'+]i signal with a mean oscillatory period of 
68s and a high frequency signal with a broadband power spectrum 
with considerable spectral density. This results is in good agree- 
ment with a study on high-frequency [Ca'+]i oscillations (PaluS 
et al., 1998) Further theoretical and experimental studies have to 
be performed to resolve the question on the functional impact of 
intracellular signaling of these independent [Ca'+]i signals. 
932 K. Prank et al. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Independent component analysis (ICA) (Comon, 1994; Jutten and Herault, 1991) 
has recently received much attention as a signal processing method which has been 
successfully applied to blind source separation and feature extraction. The goal of 
ICA is to find independent sources in an unknown linear mixture of measured sen- 
sory data. This goal is obtained by reducing 2nd-order and higher order statistical 
dependencies to make the signals as independent as possible. Mainly three different 
approaches for ICA exist. The first approach is based on batch computations min- 
imizing or maximizing some relevant criterion functions (Cardoso, 1992; Comon, 
1994). The second category contains adaptive algorithms often based on stochastic 
gradient methods, which may have implementations in neural networks (Amari et 
al., 1996; Bell and Sejnowski, 1995; Delfosse and Loubaton, 1995; Hyv/irinen and 
Oja, 1996; Jutten and Herault, 1991; Moreau and Macchi, 1993; Oja and Karhunen, 
1995). The third class of algorithms is based on a fixed-point iteration scheme for 
finding the local extrema of the kurtosis of a linear combination of the observed 
variables which is equivalent to estimating the non-Gaussian independent compo- 
nents (Hyv/irinen and Oja 1997). Here we use the fast fixed-point algorithm for 
independent component analysis proposed by Hyv/irinen and Oja (1997) to analyze 
the spario-temporal dynamics of intracellular free calcium ([Ca2+]i) in a hamaster 
insulin secreting cell (HIT). 
Oscillations of [Ca2+]i have been reported in a number of electrically excitable and 
non-excitable cells and the hypotheses of frequency coding were proposed a decade 
ago (Berridge and Galione, 1988). Recent experimental results clearly demonstrate 
that [Ca2+]i oscillations and their frequency can be specific for gene activation con- 
cerning the efficiency as well as the selectivity (Dolmetsch et al., 1998). Cells are 
highly compartmentalized structures which can not be regarded as homogenous en- 
tities. Thus, [Ca2+]i oscillations do not occur uniformly throughout the cell but 
are initiated at specific sites which are distributed in a functional and nonunifortm 
manner. These [Ca2+]i oscillations spread across individual cells in the form of 
Ca 2+ waves. [Ca2+]i gradients within cells have been proposed to initiate cell mi- 
gration, exocytosis, lymphocyte, killer cell activity, acid secretion, transcellular ion 
transport, neurotransmitter release, gap junction regulation, and numerous other 
functions (Tsien and Tsien, 1990). Due to this fact it is of major importance to 
study the spario-temporal aspects of [Ca2+]i signaling in small sub compartments 
using calcium-specific fluorescent reporter dyes and digital videomicroscopy rather 
than studying the cell as a uniform entity. The aim of this study was to define the 
independent components of the spario-temporal [Ca2+]i signal. 
2 METHODS 
2.1 
FAST FIXED-POINT ALGORITHM USING KURTOSIS FOR 
INDEPENDENT COMPONENT ANALYSIS 
In Independent Component Analysis (ICA) the original independent sources are un- 
known. In this study we have recorded the [Ca2+]i signal in single HIT-cells under 
pharmacological stimulation at different subcellular regions (m = 5) in parallel. 
The [Ca2+]i signals (mixtures of sources) are denoted as xx,x2,...,Xm. Each xi 
is expressed as the weighted sum of n unknown statistically independent compo- 
Independent Component Analysis of lntracellular Calcium Spike Data 933 
nents (ICs), denoted as s, s.,..., sn. The components are assumed to be mutually 
statistically independent and zero-mean. The measured signals xi as well as the in- 
dependent component variables can be arranged into vectors x = (xx, x2,..., Xl) 
and s = (sx, s2,..., sn) respectively. The linear relationship is given by: 
x = As (1) 
Here A is a constant mixing matrix whose elements aij are the unknown coefficients 
of the mixtures. The basic problem of ICA is to estimate both the mixing matrix 
A and the realizations of the si using only observations of the mixtures xj. In 
order to perform ICA, it is necessary to have at least as many mixtures as there 
axe independent sources (m _> n). The assumption of zero mean of the ICs is no 
restriction, as this can always be accomplished by subtracting the mean from the 
random vector x. The ICs and the columns of A can only be estimated up to a 
multiplicative constant, because any constant multiplying an IC in eq. I could be 
cancelled by dividing the corresponding column of the mixing matrix A by the same 
constant. For mathematical convenience, the ICs are defined to have unit variance 
making the (non-Gaussian) ICs unique, up to their signs (Comon, 1994). Here we 
use a novel fixed-point algorithm for ICA estimation which is based on 'contrast' 
functions whose extrema are closely connected to the estimation of ICs (Hyv/irinen 
and Oja, 1997). This method denoted as fast fixed-point algorithm has a number 
of desirable properties. First, it is easy to use, since there are no user-defined 
parameters. Furthermore, the convergence is fast, conventionally in less than 15 
steps and for an appropriate contrast function, the fixed-point algorithm is much 
more robust against outliers than most ICA algorithms. 
Most solutions to the ICA problem use the fourth-order cumulant or kurtosis of the 
signals, defined for a zero-mean random variable x as: 
kurt(x) -- E(x 4) - 3(E(x2)) 2, 
(2) 
where E{x} denotes the mathematical expectation of x. The kurtosis is negative for 
source signals whose amplitude has sub-Gaussian probability densitites (distribution 
flatter than Gaussian, positive for super Gaussian) sharper than Gaussian, and zero 
for Gausssian densities. Kurtosis is a contrast function for ICA in the following 
sense. Consider a linear combination of the measured mixtures x, say wTx, where 
the vector w is constrained so that E{(w') 2 } = 1. When w' = -si, for some i, 
i.e. when the linear combination equals, up to the sign, one of the ICs, the kurtosis 
of w' is locally minimized or maximized. This property is widely used in ICA 
algorithms and forms the basis of the fixed-point algorithm used in this study which 
finds the relevant extrema of kurtosis also for non-whitened data. Based on this fact, 
Hyv/irinen and Oja (1997) introduced a very simple and highly efficient fixed-point 
algorithm for computing ICA, calculated over sphered zero-mean vectors x, that is 
able to find the rows of the separation matrix (denoted as w) and so identify one 
independent source at a time. The algorithm which computes a gradient descent 
over the kurtosis is defined as follows: 
1. Take a random initial vector wo of unit norm. Let 1 = 1. 
2. Let wt = E{v(w_lV) 3} - 3w_i. The expectation can be estimated using 
a large sample of v vectors. 
934 K. Prank et al. 
3. Divide w by its norm (e.g. the Euclidean norm II w II: 
4. If I w[w_ ] is not close enough to 1, let 1 = 1 + 1 and go back to step 2. 
Otherwise, output the vector w. 
To calculate more than one solution, the algorithm may be run as many times as 
required. It is nevertheless, necessary to remove the information contained in the 
solutions already found, to estimate each time a different independent component. 
This can be achieved, after the fourth step of the algorithm, by simply subtracting 
the estimated solution J = w' from the unsphered data x. 
In the first step of analysis we determined the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix 
of the measured [Ca'+]i signals si to reduce the dimensionality of the system. 
Then the fast fixed-point algorithm was run using the experimental [Ca'+]i data to 
determine the ICs. The resulting ICs were analyzed in respect to their frequency 
content by computing the Fourier power spectrum. 
2.2 
MEASUREMENT OF INTRACELLULAR CALCIUM IN 
HIT-CELLS 
To measure [Ca2+]i , HIT (hamster insulin secreting tumor)-cells were loaded with 
the fluorescent indicator Fura-2/AM and Fura-2 fluorescence was recorded at five 
different subcellular regions in parallel using a dual excitation spectrofiuorometer 
videoimaging system. The emission wavelength was 510 nm and the excitation 
wavelengths were 340 nm and 380 nm respectively. The ration between the excita- 
tion wa
