Classification of Multi-Spectral Pixels 
by the 
Binary Diamond Neural Network 
Yehuda Salu 
Department of Physics and CSTEA, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059 
Abstract 
A new neural network, the Binary Diamond, is presented and its use 
as a classifier is demonstrated and evaluated. The network is of the 
feed-forward type. It learns from examples in the 'one shot' mode, 
and recruits new neurons as needed. It was tested on the problem of 
pixel classification, and performed well. Possible applications of the 
network in associative memories are outlined. 
1 INTRODUCTION: CLASSIFICATION BY CLUES 
Classification is a process by which an item is assigned to a class. Classification is 
widely used in the animal kingdom. Identifying an item as food is classification. 
Assigning words to objects, actions, feelings, and situations is classification. The 
purpose of this work is to introduce a new neural network, the Binary Diamond, 
which can be used as a general purpose classification tool. The design and 
operational mode of the Binary Diamond are influenced by observations of the 
underlying mechani.qms that take place in human classification processes. 
An item to be classified consists of basic features. Any arbitrary combination of basic 
features will be called a clue. Generally, an item will consist of many clues. Clues are 
related not only to the items which contain them, but also to the classes. Each class, 
that resides in the memory, has a list of clues which are associated with it. These clues 
1143 
1144 Salu 
are the basic building blocks of the classification rules. A classification rule for a class 
X would have the following general form: 
Classification rule: If an item contains clue X 1, or clue X2,... , or clue Xn, and if it 
does not contain clue X 1, nor clue X2, ..., nor clue X m, it is classified as belonging 
to class X. 
Clues X1,...,X n are the excitatory clues of class X, and clues X1,...,Xmare the 
inhibitory clues of class X. 
When classifying an item, we first identify the clues that it contains. We then match 
these clues with the classification rules, and find the class of the item. It may happen 
that a certain item satisfies classification rules of different classes. Some of the clues 
match one class, while others match another. In such cases, a second set of rules, 
disambiguation rules, are employed. These rules select one class out of those tagged 
by the classification rules. The disambiguation rules rely on a hierarchy that exists 
among the clues, a hierarchy that may vary from one classification scheme to another. 
For example, in a certain hierarchy clue A is considered more reliable than clue B, if 
it contains more features. In a different hierarchy scheme, the most frequent clue is 
considered the most reliable. In the disambiguation process, the most reliable clue, 
out of those that has actively contributed to the classification, is identified and serves 
as the pointer to the selected class. This classification approach will be called 
classification by clues (CBC). 
The classification rules may be 'loaded' into our memory in two ways. F'irst, the 
precise rules may be spelled out and recorded (e.g. 'A red light mean stop'). Second, 
we may learn the classification rules from examples presented to us, utilizing innate 
common sense learning mechanism. These mechanisms enable us to deduce from the 
examples presented to us, what dues should serve in the classification rules of the 
adequate classes, and what clues have no specificity, and should be ignored. For 
example, by pointing to a red balloon and saying red, an infant may associate each of 
the stimuli red and balloon as pointers to the word red. After presenting a red car, 
and saying red, and presenting a green balloon and saying green, the infant has 
enough information to deduce that the stimulus red is associated with the word red, 
and the stimulus balloon should not be classified as red. 
2 THE BINARY DIAMOND 
2.1 STRUCTURE 
In order to perform a CBC in a systematic way, all the clues that are present in the 
item to be classified have to be identified first, and then compared against the 
classification rules. The Binary Diamond enables carrying these tasks fast and 
Classification of Multi-Spectral Pixels by the Binary Diamond Neural Network 1145 
effectively. Assume that there are N different basic features in the environment. Each 
feature can be assigned to a certain bit in an N dimensional binary vector. An item 
will be represented by turning-on (from the default value of 0 to the value of 1) all the 
bits that correspond to basic features, that are present in the item. The total number 
of possible clues in this environment is at most 2 N. One way to represent these 
possible clues is by a lattice, in which each possible clue is represented by one node. 
The Binary Diamond is a lattice whose nodes represent clues. It is arranged in layers. 
The first (bottom) layer has N nodes that represent the basic features in the 
environment. The second layer has N-(N-I)/2 nodes that represent clues consisting of 
2 basic features. The K'th layer has nodes that represent clues, which consist of K 
basic features. Nodes from neighboring layers which represent clues that differ by 
exactly one basic feature are connected by a line. Figure 1 is a diagram of the Binary 
Diamond for N=4. 
Figure 1: The Binary Diamond of order 4. The numbers inside the nodes are the 
binary codes for the feature combination that the node represents, e.g 1 < = > 
(0,0,0,1), 5< = >(0,1,0,1), 14 < = > (1,1,1,0), 15 < = > (1,1,1,1). 
2.2 THE BINARY DIAMOND NEURAL NETWORK 
The Binary Diamond can be turned into a feed-forward neural network by treating 
each node as a neuron, and each line as a synapse leading from a neuron in a lower 
layer (k) to a neuron in the higher layer (k + 1). All synaptic weights are set to 0.6, and 
1146 Salu 
all thresholds are set to 1, in a standard Pitts McCulloch neuron. The output of a 
firing neuron is 1. An item is entered into the network by turning-on the neurons in 
the first layer, that represent the basic features constituting this item. Signals 
propagate forward one layer at a time tick, and neurons stay active for one time tick. 
It is easy to verify that all the clues that are part of the input item, and only such clues, 
will be turned on as the signals propagate in the network. In other words, the network 
identifies all the clues in the item to be classified. An item consisting of M basic 
features will activate neurons in the first M layers. The activated neuron in the M'th 
layer is the representation of the entire item. As an example, consider the input item 
with feature vector (0,1,1,1), using the notations of figure 1. It is entered by activating 
neurons 1, 2, and 4 in the first layer. The signals will propagate to neurons 3, 5, 6, and 
7, which represent all the clues that the input item contains. 
2.3 INCORPORATING CLASS INFORMATION 
Each neuron in the Binary Diamond represent a possle clue in the environment 
spun by N basic features. When an item is entered in the first layer, all the dues that it 
contains activate their representing neurons in the upper layers. This is the first step 
in the classification process. Next, these dues have to point to the appropriate class, 
based upon the classification rule. The possible classes are represented by neurons 
outside of the Binary Diamond. Let x denote the neuron, outside the Binary 
Diamond, that represents class X. An excitatory due X i (from the Binary Diamond) 
will synapse onto x with a synaptic weight of 1. An inhibitory due Xj (in the Binary 
Diamond) will synapse onto x with an inhibitory weight of -z, where z is a very large 
number (larger than the maximum number of dues that may point to a class). This 
arrangement ensures that the classification rule formulated above is carried out. In 
cases of ambiguity, where a number of classes have been activated in the process, the 
class that was activated by the clue in the highest layer will prevail. This clue has the 
largest number of features, as compared with the other dues that actively participated 
in the classification. 
2.4 GROWING A BINARY DIAMOND 
A possible limitation on the processes described in the two previous sections is that, if 
there are many basic features in the environment, the 2 N nodes of the Binary 
Diamond may be too much to handle. However, in practical situations, not all the 
clues really occur, and there is no need to actually represent all of them by nodes. 
One way of taking advantage of this simplifying situation is to grow the network one 
event (a training item and its classification) at a time. At the benningo there is just 
the first layer with N neurons, that represent the N basic features. Each event adds its 
neurons to the network, in the exact positions that they would occupy in the regular 
Classification of Multi-Spectral Pixels by the Binary Diamond Neural Network 1147 
Binary Diamond. A clue that has already been represented in previous events, is not 
duplicated. After the new clues of the event have been added to the network, the 
information about the relationships between clues and classes is updated. This is done 
for all the clues that are contained in the new event. The new neurons send synapses 
to the neuron that represent the class of the current event. Neurons of the current 
event, that took part in previous events, are checked for consistency. If they point to 
other classes, their synapses are cut-off. They have just lost their specificity. It should 
be noted that there is no need to present an event more than one time for it to be 
correctly recorded ('one shot learning'). A new event will never adversely interfere 
with previously recorded information. Neither the order of presenting the events, nor 
repetitions in presenting them will affect the final structure of the network. Figure 2 
illustrates 
