On the Separation of Signals from 
Neighboring Cells in Tetrode Recordings 
Maneesh Sahani, John S. Pezaris and Richard A. Andersen 
maneesh@caltech.edu, pz@caltech.edu, andersen@vis.caltech.edu 
Computation and Neural Systems 
California Institute of Technology 
216-76 Caltech, Pasadena, CA 91125 USA 
Abstract 
We discuss a solution to the problem of separating waveforms pro- 
duced by multiple cells in an extracellular neural recording. We 
take an explicitly probabilistic approach, using latent-variable mod- 
els of varying sophistication to describe the distribution of wave- 
forms produced by a single cell. The models range from a single 
Gaussian distribution of waveforms for each cell to a mixture of 
hidden Markov models. We stress the overall statistical structure 
of the approach, allowing the details of the generative model chosen 
to depend on the specific neural preparation. 
I INTRODUCTION 
Much of our empirical understanding of the systems-level functioning of the brain 
has come from a procedure called extracellular recording. The electrophysiologist 
inserts an insulated electrode with exposed tip into the extracellular space near 
one or more neuron cell bodies. Transient currents due to action potentials across 
nearby cell membranes are then recorded as deflections in potential, spikes, at the 
electrode tip. At an arbitrary location in gray matter, an extracellular probe is likely 
to see pertubations due to firing in many nearby cells, each cell exhibiting a distinct 
waveform due to the differences in current path between the cells and the electrode 
tip. Commonly, the electrode is maneuvered until all the recorded deflections have 
almost the same shape; the spikes are then all presumed to have arisen from a 
single isolated cell. This process of cell isolation is time-consuming, and it permits 
recording from only one cell at a time. If differences in spike waveform can be 
exploited to sort recorded events by cell, the experimental cost of extracellular 
recording can be reduced, and data on interactions between simultaneously recorded 
cells can be obtained. 
Separation of Signals from Neighboring Cells 223 
Many ad hoc solutions to spike sorting have been proposed and implemented, but 
thus far an explicit statistical foundation, with its accompanying benefits, has 
mostly been lacking. Lewicki (1994) is the exception to this rule and provides a well- 
founded probabilistic approach, but uses assumptions (such as isotropic Gaussian 
variability) that are not well supported in many data sets (see Fee et al (1996)). 
A first step in the construction of a solution to the spike-sorting problem is the 
specification of a model by which the data are taken to be generated. The model 
has to be powerful enough to account for most of the variability observed in the 
data, while being simple enough to allow tractable and robust inference. In this 
paper we will discuss a number of models, of varying sophistication, that fall into 
a general framework. We will focus on the assumptions and inferential components 
that are common to these models and consider the specific models only briefly. In 
particular, we will state the inference algorithms for each model without derivation 
or proof; the derivations, as well as measures of performance, will appear elsewhere. 
2 DATA COLLECTION 
The algorithms that appear in this paper are likely to be of general applicabil- 
ity. They have been developed, however, with reference to data collected from the 
parietal cortex of adult rhesus macaques using retrodes (Pezaris et al 1997). 
The tetrode is a bundle of four individually insulated 13pm-diameter wires twisted 
together and cut so that the exposed ends lie close together. The potential on each 
wire is amplified (custom electronics), low-pass filtered (9-pole Bessel filter, fc - 
6.4 kHz) to prevent aliasing, and digitized (fs between 12.8 and 20 kHz) (filters and 
A/D converter from Tucker Davis Technologies). This data stream is recorded to 
digital media; subsequent operations are currently performed off-line. 
In preparation for inference, cemdidate events (where at least one cell fired) are 
identified in the data stream. The signal is digitally high-pass filtered (fc = 0.05fs) 
and the root-meem-square (RMS) amplitude on each channel is calculated. This 
value is an upper bound on the noise power, emd approaches the actual value when 
the firing rates of resolvable cells are low. Epochs where the signal rises above three 
times the RMS amplitude for two consecutive signals are taken to be spike events. 
The signal is upsampled in the region of each such threshold crossing, and the time 
of the maximal subsequent peak across all channels is determined to within one- 
tenth of a sample. A short section is then extracted at the original fs such that this 
peak time falls at a fixed position in the extracted segment. One such waveform is 
extracted for each threshold crossing. 
3 GENERATIVE FRAMEWORK 
Our basic model is as follows. The recorded potential trace V(t) is the sum of 
influences that are due to resolvable foreground cells (which have a relatively large 
effect) and a background noise process. We write 
V(t) = E (cS[(t- r)+ 4S;(t- r) +...)+ rl(t) (1) 
T 
Here, c,, is an indicator variable that takes the value I if the ruth cell fires at time 
r and 0 otherwise. If cell m fires at r it adds a deflection of shape S, (t - r) to the 
recorded potential. The effect of all background neural sources, mad any electrical 
noise, is gathered into a single term r/(t). For a multichannel probe, such as a 
tetrode, all of V(t), r(t) and S,(t) are vector-valued. Note that we have indexed 
224 M. Sahani, J. S. Pegaris and R. A Andersen 
(5) (3 
Figure 1: Schematic graph of the general framework. 
the spike shapes from the ruth cell by time; this allows us to model changes in the 
spike waveform due to intrinsic biophysical processes (such as sodium inactivation 
during a burst of spikes) as separate to the additive background process. We will 
discuss models where the choice of S is purely stochastic, as well as models in 
which both the probability of firing and the shape of the action potential depend 
on the recent history of the cell. 
It will be useful to rewrite (1) in terms of the event waveforms described in section 2. 
At times r when no foreground cell fires all the c are zero. We index the remaining 
i for  at r i (similarly for 
times (when at least one cell fired) by i and write c, 
to obtain 
(qS(t-)+c.&. ')+ .)+(t) (2) 
v(t) = .. 
i 
This basic model is sketched, for the case of two cells, in figure 1. Circles repre 
sent stochastic variables and squares deterministic functions, while arrows indicate 
conditional or functional dependence. We have not drawn nodes for 0n emd 0. 
The representation chosen is similar to, and motivated by, a directed acyclic graph 
(DAG) model of the generative distribution. For clarity, we have not drawn edges 
that represent dependencies across time steps; the measurement V(t) depends on 
many nearby values of S, and c, and r/(t) may be autocorrelated. We will con- 
tinue to omit these edges, even when we later show connections in time between c  
m 
and S. 
4 INFERENCE 
We have two statistical objectives. The first is model selection, which includes the 
choice of the number of cells in the foreground. The second is inference: finding 
good estimates for the c given the measured V(t). We will have little to say on 
the subject of model selection in this paper, besides making the observation that 
standard techniques such as cross-validation, penalized likelihood or approximation 
of the marginal likelihood (or evidence) are all plausible approaches. We will 
instead focus on the inference of the spike times. 
Rather than calculating the marginalized posterior for the c we will find the dis- 
tribution conditioned on the most probable values of the other variables. This is a 
common approximation to the true posterior (compare Lewicki (1994)). 
A simple property of the data allows us to estimate the most probable values of 
Separation of SignaIs from Neighboring Cells 225 
the parameters in stages; times at which at least one foreground cell fires can be 
identified by a threshold, as described in section 2. We can then estimate the noise 
parameters )n by looking at segments Of the signal with no foreground spikes, the 
waveform distribution and firing time parameters ) from the collection of spike 
events, and finally the spike times c and the waveforms $n by a filtering process 
applied to the complete data V(t) given these model parameters. 
4.1 NOISE 
We study the noise distribution as follows. We extract lms segments from a band- 
passed recording sampled at 16 kHz from a four-channel electrode, avoiding the 
foreground spikes identified as in section 2. Each segment is thus a 64-dimensional 
object. We find the principal components of the ensemble of such vectors, and 
construct histograms of the projections of the vectors in these directions. A few of 
these histograms are shown on a log-scale in figure 2 (points), as well as a zero-mean 
Gaussian fit to the distribution projected along the same axes (lines). It is clear 
that the Gaussian is a reasonable description, although a slight excess in kurtosis 
is visible in the higher principal components. 
pc I pc 12 
10  
10 - 
-1 O0 0 100 -50 0 
pV 
pc 48 
pc 24 pc 36 
0 20 -20 0 
50 -20 20 -20 0 20 
Figure 2: Distribution of background noise. 
The noise parameters are now seen to be the covariance of the noise, U (we repre- 
sent it as a covariance matrix taken over the length of a spike). In general, we can 
fit an autoregressive process description to the background and apply a filter that 
will whiten the noise. This will prove to be quite useful during the filtering stages. 
4.2 WAVEFORM PARAMETERS 
We can make some general remarks about the process of inferring the
