Grouping Contours by Iterated Pairing Network 
Arenon $hashua 
M.I.T. Artificial Intelligence Lab., NE43-737 
and Department of Brain and Cognitive Science 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
Abstract 
Shimon Ullman 
We describe in this paper a network that performs grouping of image con- 
tours. The input to the net are fragments of image contours, and the 
output is the partitioning of the fragments into groups, together with a 
saliency measure for each group. The grouping is based on a measure of 
overall length and curvature. The network decomposes the overall opti- 
mization problem into independent optimal pairing problems performed 
at each node. The resulting computation maps into a uniform locally 
connected network of simple computing elements. 
I The Problem: Contour Grouping 
A problem that often arises in visual information processing is the linking of con- 
tour fragments into optimal groups. For example, certain subsets of contours spon- 
taneously form perceptual groups, as illustrated in Fig. 1, and are often detected 
immediately without scanning the image in a systematic manner. Grouping process 
of this type are likely to play an important role in object recognition by segmenting 
the image and selecting image structures that are likely to correspond to objects of 
interest in the scene. 
We propose that some form of autonomous grouping is performed at an early stage 
based on geometrical characteristics, that are independent of the identity of objects 
to be selected. The grouping process is governed by the notion of saliency in a way 
that priority is given to forming salient groups at the expense of potentially less 
salient ones. This general notion can again be illustrated by Fig. 1; it appears that 
certain groups spontaneously emerge, while grouping decisions concerning the less 
salient parts of the image may remain unresolved. As we shall see, the computation 
below exhibits a similar behavior. 
We define a grouping of the image contours as the formation of a set of disjoint 
335 
336 Shashua and Ullman 
Figure 1: Contours that spontaneously form perceptual groups with various degrees of 
saliency. On the left is an edge image of a plane surrounded by a car, a house, trees 
and texture. The image on the right contains three circles, having decreasing degrees of 
saJiency, in a background of randomly placed and oriented segments. 
groups, each corresponding to a curve that may have any number of gaps, and 
whose union covers all the contour fragments in the image. Given a function F(A) 
that measures some desired property of a group A, we would like to find a disjoint set 
of groups {A1, ...,A,} that maximizes y' F(A) over all possible groupings. Our 
definition of the problem is related to, but not identical with, problems studied in 
the past under headings of perceptual organization, segmentation, cueing and 
figure-ground separation. In our definition of grouping, local grouping decisions 
based on collinearity of neighboring edge segments may be overridden in favor of 
more global decisions that are governed by the overall saliency of the groups. 
The paper introduces a novel grouping method having the following properties: (i) 
the grouping optimizes all overall saliency measure, (ii) the optimization problem 
is mapped onto a uniform locally connected network of simple computing elements, 
and (iii) the network's architecture and its computation are different in several 
respects from traditional neural network models. 
2 Optimal Grouping 
For the purpose of grouping it is convenient to consider the image as a graph of 
edge elements. The vertices of the graph correspond to image pixels, and the arcs to 
elementary edge fragments. The input to the grouping problem is a contour image, 
represented by a subset E of the elements in the graph. A path in the graph 
corresponds to a contour in the image having any number of gaps. This implies 
that the grouping process implicitly bridges across gaps. This filling-in process is 
critical to any grouping scheme as demonstrated by the circles in Fig. 1. 
The emphasis in this paper is on 1-D chains of elements such as objects' bounding 
contours. Grouping is therefore a collections of chains of A1, ..., Am such that Ai  
Aj - 0 i  j and LJiAi D E r. To define an optimal grouping we will define a 
function F(A) that measures the quality of a group A. An optimal grouping is then 
a grouping that maximizes x F(A) over all possible groupings of the elements. 
Grouping Contours by Iterated Pairing Network 337 
2.1 The Quality Measure of a Group, F(A) 
The definition of the measure F(A) is motivated by both perceptual and compu- 
tational considerations. In agreement with perceptual observations, it is defined 
to favor long smooth contours. Its form is also designed to facilitate distributed 
multistage optimization, as discussed below. 
To define F(A) of a chain of elements A: {el, ..., era}, consider first a single element 
el, and the n preceding elements in the chain. We use first a quantity s,(i) which 
is the contribution of the n preceding elements to el, which is: 
i 
= 
j=max{1,i--n} 
aj is defined as 1 when ej corresponds to a contour fragment in the image and 0 for 
gaps. s, (i) is therefore simply a weighted sum of the contributions of the elements 
in the chain. The weighting factor Cij is taken to be a decreeing function of the 
total curvature of the path 7ij between elements ei and ej. This will lead to a 
grouping that prefers curves with small overall curvature over wiggly ones. Cii is 
given by the formula: 
Gj = e f,,iSds 
The exponent is the squared total curvature of the path between elements ei and e, 
and the resulting C 0 lies between 0 (highly curved contour) and 1 (straight line). 
For a discrete sampling of the curve, Cii can be approximated by the product' 
%: c. = 1 
p=i 
where fp,q is referred to as the coupling constant between adjacent elements ep and 
eq and is given by fr,q = e--atari  where a is the angle menuring the orientation 
difference between p and q [3]. In a similar manner, one can define s.i), the 
contribution of the n elements following e in the chain. &(i) = s.(i) + S.(i) - 
ai menures the contribution to element ei kom both direction. This incre.es 
monotonically with the leugth and low total curvature of the curve psing through 
element ei. Then then the overall quality of the chain A is finally given by 
i=1 
F,(A) increases quadratically with the size of A and is non-linear with respect to 
the total curvature of A. Maximizing  F(Aj) over all possible groupings will, 
therefore, prefer groups that are long and smooth. As n increases, the measure F, 
will depend on larger portions of the curve surrounding each element, resulting in 
a finer discrimination betweeu groups. In practice, we limit the measure to a finite 
n, and the optimal grouping is defined as: 
m 
In = arg max E Fn(Ai) 
m,A,...,Am i=1 
where the max is taken over all possible groupings. That is, we are looking for 
a grouping that will maximize the overall criterion function based on length and 
smoothness. 
338 Shashua and Ullman 
3 The Optimization Approach 
Optimizing I, is a nonlinear problem with an energy landscape that can be quite 
complex making it difficult to find a global optimum, or even good local optima, 
using straightforward gradient descent methods. We define below a computation 
that proceeds in two stages, saliency and pairing stages, of n steps each. In the 
saliency stage we compute, by iterating a local computation, optimal values of 
$n(i) for all elements in the graph. These values are an upper-bound on the saliency 
values achievable by any grouping. In the pairing stage we further update $,(i) by 
repeatedly forming local pairings of elements at each node of the graph. The details 
of both stages are given below. 
3.1 Saliency Stage 
For any given grouping A1, ..., Am, because they are disjoint, we have that 
m N 
y. F,(Ai) =  $,.,(i) _< 
j=l i=1 
where N is the number of elements in the graph and 7i is a curve passing through 
element ei. We denote S..(i) to be the saliency of element ei with respect to a curve 
7i. We therefore have that the maximal saliency value $.*(i) '-- max., S.(i) is an 
upper-bound on the saliency value element ei receives on the optimal grouping I.. 
We define a local computation on the grid of elements such that each element ei 
computes maximal S,(i) by iterating the following simple computation, at each 
step taking the maximal contribution of its neighbors. 
so(i) = ai 
s,+(i) = ai + m.axs.(j)fij (1) 
$ 
where this computation is performed by all elements in parallel. It can be shown 
that at the n'th iteration s(i) is maximal over all possible curves of length n, 
having any number of gaps, that come into ei. Since $,(i)= s,(i)+ ,(i)-ai, we 
have found the maximal S (i) as well. For further details on the properties of this 
computation, see [3]. Note that since the computation is carried by all elements of 
the net, including gaps (r equals 0), the gaps are filled-in as a by-product of the 
computation. One can show that the filling-in contour between two end-elements 
has the smallest overall curvature, and therefore has the shape of a cubic spline. 
3.2 Pairing Stage 
Given the optimal saliency values $*(i) computed at the saliency stage we would like 
next to find a near-optimal grouping I,. We first note the one-to-one correspondence 
between a grouping and a pairing of elements at each node of the r. aph. We define 
a pairing to be a partition of the k elements around node P into [7] disjoint pairs. 
A pairing performed over all nodes of the net creates an equivalence relation over 
the elements of the net and therefore, by transitivity, determines a grouping. We 
therefore proceed by selecting a pairing at each node of the net that will yield a 
near optimal grouping I. 
Given s,(i), the optimal saliency values computed by (1), and a 
