A Novel Reinforcement Model of 
Birdsong Vocalization Learning 
Kenji Doya 
ATR Human Information Processing 
Research Laboratories 
2-2 Hikaridai, Seika, Kyoto 619-02, Japan 
Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
UCSD and Salk Institute, 
San Diego, CA 92186-5800, USA 
Abstract 
Songbirds learn to imitate a tutor song through auditory and motor learn- 
ing. We have developed a theoretical framework for song learning that 
accounts for response properties of neurons that have been observed in 
many of the nuclei that are involved in song learning. Specifically, we 
suggest that the anteriorforebrain pathway, which is not needed for song 
production in the adult but is essential for song acquisition, provides 
synaptic perturbations and adaptive evaluations for syllable vocalization 
learning. A computer model based on reinforcement learning was con- 
structed that could replicate a real zebra finch song with 90% accuracy 
based on a spectrographic measure. The second generation of the bird- 
song model replicated the tutor song with 96% accuracy. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Studies of motor pattern generation have generally focussed on innate motor behaviors that 
are genetically preprogrammed and fine-tuned by adaptive mechanisms (Harris-Warrick 
et al., 1992). Birdsong learning provides a favorable opportunity for investigating the 
neuronal mechanisms for the acquisition of complex motor patterns. Much is known about 
the neuroethology of birdsong and its neuroanatomical substrate (see Nottebohm, 1991 and 
Doupe, 1993 for reviews), but relatively little is known about the overall system from a 
computational viewpoint. We propose a set of hypotheses for the functions of the brain 
nuclei in the song system and explore their computational strength in a model based on 
biological constraints. The model could reproduce real and artificial birdsongs in a few 
hundred learning trials. 
102 Kenji Doya, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Direct Motor Pathway 
Anterior Forebrain Pathway 
ynnx 
respiratory 
system 
Figure 1: Major songbird brain nuclei involved in song control. The dark arrows show 
the direct motor control pathway and the gray arrows show the anterior forebrain pathway. 
Abbreviations: Uva, nucleus uvaeformis of the thalamus; NIf, nucleus interface of the 
neostriatum; L, field L (primary auditory are of the forebrain); HVc, higher vocal center; RA, 
robust nucleus of the archistriatum; DM, dorso-medial part of the nucleus intercollicularis; 
nXIIts, tracheosyringeal part of the hypoglossal nucleus; AVT, ventral area of Tsai of the 
midbrain; X, area X of lobus parolfactorius; DLM, medial part of the dorsolateral nucleus 
of the thalamus; LMAN, lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior neostriatum. 
2 NEUROETHOLOGY OF BIRDSONG 
Although songs from individual birds of the same species may sound quite similar, a young 
male songbird learns to sing by imitating the song of a tutor, which is usually the father or 
another adult male in the colony. If a young bird does not hear a tutor song during a critical 
period, it will sing short, poorly structured songs, and if a bird is deafened in the period 
when it practices vocalization, it develops highly abnormal songs. These observations 
indicate that there are two phases in song learning: the sensory learning phase when a 
young bird memorizes song templates and the motor learning phase in which the bird 
establishes the motor programs using auditory feedback (Konishi, 1965). These two phases 
can be separated by several months in some species, implying that birds have remarkable 
capability for memorizing complex temporal sequences. Once a song is crystallized, its 
pattern is very stable. Even deafening the bird has little immediate effect. 
The brain nuclei involved in song learning are shown in Figure 1. The primary motor 
control pathway is composed of Uva, NIf, HVc, RA, DM, and nXIIts. If any of these nuclei 
is lesioned, a bird cannot sing normally. Experimental studies suggest that HVc is involved 
in generating syllable sequences and that RA produces motor commands for each syllable 
(Vu et al., 1994). Interestingly, neurons in HVc, RA and nXIIts show vigorous auditory 
responses, suggesting that the motor control system is closely coupled with the auditory 
system (Nottebohm, 1991). 
There is also a bypass from HVc to RA which consists of area X, DLM, and LMAN 
called the anteriorforebrain pathway (Doupe, 1993). This pathway is not directly involved 
A Novel Reinforcement of Birdsong Vocalization Learning 103 
auditory 
preprocessing 
/ / 
syllable encoding 
sequence generation motor pattern generation 
/ 
I v I nx,ts I 
reinforcement memory of tutor song synaptic perturbation 
attention normalized evaluation gradient estimate 
Figure 2: Schematic of primary song control nuclei and their proposed functions in the 
present model of bird song learning. 
in vocalization because lesions in these nuclei in adult birds do not impair their crystallized 
songs. However, lesions in area X and LMAN during the motor learning phase result in 
contrasting deficits. The songs of LMAN-lesioned birds crystallize prematurely, whereas 
the songs of area X-lesioned birds remain variable (Scharff and Nottebohm, 1991). It has 
been suggested that this pathway is responsible for the storage of song templates (Doupe 
and Konishi, 1991) or guidance of the synaptic connection from HVc to RA (Mooney, 
1992). 
3 FUNCTIONAL NEUROANATOMY OF BIRDSONG 
The song learning process can be decomposed into three stages. In the first stage, suitable 
internal acoustic representations of syllables and syllable combinations are constructed. 
This auditory template can be assembled by unsupervised learning schemes like cluster- 
ing and principal components analysis. The second stage involves the encoding of phonetic 
sequences using the internal representation. If the representation is sparse or nearly orthog- 
onal, sequential transition can be easily encoded by Hebbian learning. The third stage is 
an inverse mapping from the internal auditory representation into spatio-temporal patterns 
of motor commands. This can be accomplished by exploration in the space of motor com- 
mands using reinforcement learning. The responses of the units that encode the acoustic 
primitives can be used to the evaluate the resulting auditory signal and direct the exploration. 
How are these three computational stages organized within the brain areas and pathways 
of the songbird? Figure 2 gives an overview of our current working hypothesis. Auditory 
inputs are pre-processed in field L. Some higher-order representations, such as syllables and 
syllable combinations, are established in HVc depending on the bird's auditory experience. 
Moreover, transitions between syllables are encoded in the HVc network. The sequential 
activation of syllable coding units in HVc are transformed into the time course of motor 
commands in RA. DM and nXIIts control breathing and the muscles in syrinx, bird's vocal 
organ. 
104 Kenji Doya, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
a 
trachea  
tympaniform 
membranes 
bronchus -- 
b 
T1 
T2/ 
Figure 3: (a) The syrinx of songbirds. (b) The model syrinx. 
The consequences of selective lesions of areas in the anterior forebrain pathway (Scharff 
and Nottebohm, 1991) are consistent with the failures expected for a reinforcement learning 
system. In particular, we suggest that this pathway serves the function of an adaptive critic 
with stochastic search elements (Barto et al., 1983). We propose that LMAN perturbs the 
synaptic connections from HVc to RA and area X regulates LMAN by the song evaluation. 
Modulation of HVc to RA connection by LMAN is biologically plausible since LMAN 
input to RA is mediated mainly by NMDA type synapses, which can modulate the amplitude 
of mainly non-NMDA type synaptic input from HVc (Mooney, 1992). 
The assumption that area X provides evaluation is supported by the fact that it receives 
catecholaminergic projection (dopamine of norepinephrine) from a midbrain nucleus AVT 
(Lewis et al., 1981). These neurotransmitters are used in many species for reinforcement 
or attention signals. It is known that auditory learning is enhanced when associated with 
visual or social interaction with the tutor. Area X is a candidate region where auditory 
inputs from HVc are associated with reinforcing input from AVT during auditory learning. 
4 CONSTRUCTION OF SONG LEARNING MODEL 
In order to test the above hypothesis, we constructed a computer model of the birdsong 
learning system. The specific aim was to simulate the process of explorative motor learning, 
in which the time course of motor command for each syllable is determined by auditory 
template matching. We assumed that orthogonal representations for syllables and their se- 
quential activation were already established in HVc and that an auditory template matching 
mechanism exists in area X. 
4.1 The syrinx 
The bird's syrinx is located near the j unction of the trachea and the bronchi (Vicario, 1991). 
Its sound source is the tympaniform membrane which faces to the bronchus on one side 
and the air sac on the other (Figure 3a). When some of the syringeal muscles contract, the 
lumen of the bronchus is throttled and produces vibration in the membrane. When stretched 
along one dimension, the membrane produces harmonic sounds, but when stretched along 
two dimensions, the sound contains non-harmonic components (Casey and Gaunt, 1985). 
Accordingly, we provided two sound sources for the model syrinx (Figure 3b). The 
fundamental frequency of the harmonic component was controlled by the membrane tension 
in one direction (T1). The amplitude of the noisy component was proportional to the 
A Novel Reinforcement of Birdsong Vocalization Learning 105 
Ex 
DM 
HVc RA nXllts 
LMAN 
Figure 4: RA units with different spatio-temporal output profiles are driven by locally- 
coded HVc units. LMAN perturbs the weights W betwe
