Serial Order in Reading Aloud: 
Connectionist Models and Neighborhood 
Structure 
Jeanne C. Milostan_ 
Computer Science & Engineering 0114 
University of California San Diego 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0114 
Garrison W. Cottrell 
Computer Science k Engineering 0114 
University of California San Diego 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0114 
Abstract 
Dual-Route and Connectionist Single-Route models of reading have 
been at odds over claims as to the correct explanation of the reading 
process. Recent Dual-Route models predict that subjects should 
show an increased naming latency for irregular words when the ir- 
regularity is earlier in the word (e.g. chef is slower than glow) - a 
prediction that has been confirmed in human experiments. Since 
this would appear to be an effect of the left-to-right reading process, 
Coltheart & Rastle (1994) claim that Single-Route parallel connec- 
tionist models cannot account for it. A refutation of this claim is 
presented here, consisting of network models which do show the 
interaction, along with orthographic neighborhood statistics that 
explain the effect. 
I Introduction 
A major component of the task of learning to read is the development of a mapping 
from orthography to phonology. In a complete model of reading, message under- 
standing must play a role, but many psycholinguistic phenomena can be explained 
in the context of this simple mapping task. A difficulty in learning this mapping 
is that in a language such as English, the mapping is quasiregular (Plaut et al., 
1996); there are a wide range of exceptions to the general rules. As with nearly 
all psychological phenomena, more frequent stimuli are processed faster, leading to 
shorter naming latencies. The regularity of mapping interacts with this variable, 
a robust finding that is well-explained by connectionist accounts (Seidenberg and 
M.cClelland, 1989; Taraban and McClelland, 1987). 
In this paper we consider a recent effect that seems difficult to account for in terms 
of the standard parallel network models. Coltheart  Rastle (1994) have shown 
60 J. C. Milostan and G. W. CottreIl 
Position of Irregular Phoneme 
Filler ! 2 3 4 5 
Nonword 
Irregular 554 542 530 529 537 
Regular Control 502 516 518 523 525 
Difference 52 26 12 6 12 
Exception 
Irregular 545 524 528 526 528 
Regular Control 500 503 503 515 524 
Difference 45 21 25 11 4 
Avg. Diff. 48.5 23.5 18.5 
Table 1: Naming Latency vs. Irregularity Position 
8.5 8 
that the amount of delay experienced in naming an exception word is related to the 
phonemic position of the irregularity in pronunciation. Specifically, the earlier the 
exception occurs in the word, the longer the latency to the onset of pronouncing 
the word. Table 1, adapted from (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994) shows the response 
latencies to two-syllable words by normal subjects. There is a clear left-to-right 
ranking of the latencies compared to controls in the last row of the Table. Coltheart 
et al. claim this delay ranking cannot be achieved by standard connectionist models. 
This paper shows this claim to be false, and shows that the origin of the effect lies in 
a statistical regularity of English, related to the number of friends and enemies 
of the pronunciation within the word's neighborhood 1 
2 Background 
Computational modeling of the reading task has been approached from a number 
of different perspectives. Advocates of a dual-route model of oral reading claim 
that two separate routes, one lexical (a lexicon, often hypothesized to be an asso- 
ciative network) and one rule-based, are required to account for certain phenomena 
in reaction times and nonword pronunciation seen in human subjects (Coltheart 
et al., 1993). Connectionist modelers claim that the same phenomena can be cap- 
tured in a single-route model which learns simply by exposure to a representative 
dataset (Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989). 
In the Dual-Route Cascade model (DRC) (Coltheart et al., 1993), the lexical route 
is implemented as an Interactive Activation (McClelland and Rumelhart, 1981) 
system, while the non-lexical route is implemented by a set of grapheme-phoneme 
correspondence (GPC) rules learned from a dataset. Input at the letter identifica- 
tion layer is activated in a left-to-right sequential fashion to simulate the reading 
direction of English, and fed simultaneously to the two pathways in the model. 
Activation from both the GPC route and the lexicon route then begins to interact 
at the output (phoneme) level, starting with the phonemes at the beginning of the 
word. If the GPC and the lexicon agree on pronunciation, the correct phonemes 
will be activated quickly. For words with irregular pronunciation, the lexicon and 
GPC routes will activate different phonemes: the GPC route will try to activate 
the regular pronunciation while the lexical route will activate the irregular (correct) 
Friends are words with the same pronunciations for the ambiguous letter-to-sound 
correspondence; enemies are words with different pronunciations. 
Serial Order in Reading Aloud 61 
pronunciation. Inhibitory links between alternate phoneme pronunciations will slow 
down the rise in activation, causing words with inconsistencies to be pronounced 
more slowly than regular words. This slowing will not occur, however, when an 
irregularity appears late in a word. This is because in the model the lexical node 
spreads activation to all of a word's phonemes as soon as it becomes active. If an 
irregularity is late in a word, the correct pronunciation will begin to be activated 
before the GPC route is able to vote against it. Hence late irregularities will not be 
as affected by conflicting information. This result is validated by simulations with 
the one-syllable DRC model (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994). 
Several connectionist systems have been developed to model the orthography to 
phonology process (Seidenberg and McClelland, 1989; Plaut et al., 1996). These 
connectionist models provide evidence that the task, with accompanying phenom- 
ena, can be learned through a single mechanism. In particular, Plaut et al. (hence- 
forth PMSP) develop a recurrent network which duplicates the naming latencies 
appropriate to their data set, consisting of approximately 3000 one-syllable En- 
glish words (monosyllabic words with frequency greater than i in the Kucera & 
Francis corpus (Kucera and Francis, 1967)). Naming latencies are computed based 
on time-to-settle for the recurrent network, and based on MSE for a feed-forward 
model used in some simulations. In addition to duplicating frequency and regularity 
interactions displayed in previous human studies, this model also performs appro- 
priately in providing pronunciation of pronounceable nonwords. This provides an 
improvement over, and a validation of, previous work with a strictly feed-forward 
network (Seldenberg and McClelland, 1989). However, to date, no one has shown 
that Coltheart's naming latency by irregularity of position interaction can be ac- 
counted for by such a model. Indeed, it is difficult to see how such a model could 
account for such a phenomenon, as its explanation (at least in the DRC model) 
seems to require the serial, left-to-right nature of processing in the model, whereas 
networks such as PMSP present the word orthography all at once. In the following, 
we fill this gap in the literature, and explain why a parallel, feed-forward model can 
account for this result. 
3 Experiments & Results 
3.1 The Data 
Pronunciations for approximately 100,000 English words were obtained through an 
electronic dictionary developed by CMU 2. The provided format was not amenable 
to an automated method for distinguishing the number of syllables in the word. To 
obtain syllable counts, English two-syllable words were gathered from the Medical 
Research Council (MRC) Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994), 
which is conveniently annotated with syllable counts and frequency (only those with 
Kucera-Francis written frequency of one or greater were selected). Intersecting the 
two databases resulted in 5,924 two-syllable words. There is some noise in the data; 
ZONED and AERIAL, for example, are in this database of purported two-syllable 
words. Due to the size of the database and time limitations, we did not prune the 
data of these errors, nor did we eliminate proper nouns or foreign words. Single- 
syllable words with the same frequency criterion were also selected for comparison 
with previous work. 3,284 unique single-syllable words were obtained, in contrast 
to 2,998 words used by PMSP. Similar noisy data as in the two-syllable set exists 
in this database. Each word was represented using the orthography and phonology 
representation scheme outlined by PMSP. 
Available via ftp://ftp.cs.cmu.edu/project/fgdat a/dict / 
62 J. C. Milostan and G. W. CottreIl 
0.0 
0 i 2 3 4 
0.6- 
0.2- 
0,0 
Figure 1: 1-syllable network latency differences &; neighborhood statistics 
3.2 Methods 
For the single syllable words, we used an identical network to the feed-forward net- 
work used by PMSP, i.e., a 105-100-61 network, and for the two syllable words, we 
simply used the same architecture with the each layer size doubled. We trained each 
network for 300 epochs, using batch training with a cross entropy objective function, 
an initial learning rate of 0.001, momentum of 0.9 after the first 10 epochs, weight 
decay of 0.0001, and delta-bar-delta learning rate adjustment. Training exemplars 
were weighted by the log of frequency as found in the Kucera-Francis corpus. Af- 
ter this training, the single syllable feed-forward networks averaged 98.6% correct 
outputs, using the same evaluation technique outlined in PMSP. Two syllable net- 
works were trained for 1700 epochs using online training, a learning rate of 0.05, 
momentum of 0.9 after the first 10 epochs, and raw frequency weighting. The two 
syllable network achieved 85% correct. Naming latency was
