A Neural Network Autoassociator for 
Induction Motor Failure Prediction 
Thomas Petsche, Angelo Marcantonio, Christian Darken, 
Stephen J. Hanson, Gary M. Kuhn and Iwan Santoso 
[PETSCHE, ANGELO, DARKEN, JOSE, GMK, NIS] @SCR.SIEMENS.COM 
Siemens Corporate Research, Inc. 
755 College Road East 
Princeton, NJ 08853 
Abstract 
We present results on the use of neural network based autoassociators 
which act as novelty or anomaly detectors to detect imminent motor 
failures. The autoassociator is trained to reconstruct spectra obtained 
from the healthy motor. In laboratory tests, we have demonstrated that the 
trained autoassociator has a small reconstruction error on measurements 
recorded from healthy motors but a larger error on those recorded from a 
motor with a fault. We have designed and built a motor monitoring system 
using an autoassociator for anomaly detection and are in the process of 
testing the system at three industrial and commercial sites. 
1 Introduction 
An unexpected breakdown of an electric induction motor can cause financial loss signif- 
icantly in excess of the cost of the motor. For example, the breakdown of a motor in a 
production line during a production run can cause the loss of work in progress as well as 
loss of production time. 
When a motor does fail, it is not uncommon to replace it with an oversized motor based on 
the assumption that if a motor is not running at its design limit then it will survive longer. 
While this is frequently effective, this leads to significantly lower operating efficiencies and 
higher initial and operating costs. 
The primary motivation behind this project is the observation that if a motor breakdown and 
be predicted before the actual breakdown occurs, then the motor can be replaced in a more 
orderly way, with minimal interruption of the process in which it is involved. The goal is 
to produce a system that is conceptually similar to a fuel gauge on an automobile. When 
the system detects conditions that indicate that the motor is approaching its end-of-life, the 
operators are notified that a replacement is necessary in the near future. 
A Neural Network Autoassociator for Induction Motor Failure Prediction 925 
2 Background 
At present, motors in critical operations that are subject to mechanical failures - for example, 
fire pump motors on US Navy vessels - are typically monitored by a human expert who 
periodically listens to the vibrations of the motor and, based on experience, determines 
whether the motor sounds healthy or sounds like a problem is developing. Since mechanical 
problems in motors typically lead to increased or changed vibrations, this technique can 
work well. Unfortunately, it depends on a competent and expensive expert. 
In an attempt to automate motor monitoring, several vendors have automated motor moni- 
toring equipment available. For mechanical failure monitoring, such systems typically rely 
on several accelerometers to measure the vibration of the motor at various points and along 
various axes. The systems then display information, primarily about the vibration spectrum, 
to an operator who determines whether the motor is functioning properly. These systems 
are expensive since they rely on several accelerometers, each of which is itself expensive, 
as well as data collection hardware and a computer. Further, the systems require an expert 
operator and frequently require that the motor be tested only when it is driving a known load. 
Neither the human motor expert nor the existing motor monitoring systems provide an 
affordable solution for continuous on-line mechanical failure monitoring. However, the 
success of the human expert and existing vibration monitors does demonstrate that in fact, 
there is sufficient information in the vibration of an electric induction motor to detect 
imminent mechanical failures. 
Siemens Energy and Automation has proposed a new product, the Siemens Advanced Motor 
Master System II (SAMMS II), that will continuously monitor and protect an electric induc- 
tion motor while it is operating on-line. Like the presently available SAMMS, the SAMMS 
II is designed to provide protection against thermal and electrical overload an, in addition, 
it will provide detection of insulation deterioration and mechanical fault monitoring. 
In contrast to existing systems and techniques, the SAMMS II is designed to (1) require 
no human expert to determine if a motor is developing problems; (2) be inexpensive; and 
(3) provide continuous, on-line monitoring of the motor in normal operation. 
The requirements for the SAMMS II, in particular the cost constraint, require that several 
issues be resolved. First, in order to produce a low cost system, it is necessary to eliminate 
the need for expensive accelerometers. Second, wiring should be limited to the motor control 
center, i.e., it should not be necessary to run new signal wires from the motor control center 
to the motor. Third, the SAMMS II is to provide continuous on-line monitoring, so the 
system must adapt to or factor out the effect of changing loads on the motor. Finally since 
the SAMMS II would not necessarily be bundled with a motor and so might be used to 
control and monitor an arbitrary motor from an arbitrary manufacturer, the design can not 
assume that a full description of the motor construction is available. 
3 Approach 
The first task was to determine how to eliminate the accelerometers. Based on work done 
elsewhere (Schoen, Habetler & Bartheld, 1994), SE&A determined that it might be possible 
to use measurements of the current on a single phase of the power supply to estimate the 
vibration of the motor. This depends on the assumption that any vibration of the motor will 
cause the rotor to move radially relative to the stator which will cause changes in the airgap 
which, in turn, will induce changes in the current. 
Experiments were done at the Georgia Institute of Technology to determine the feasibility 
of this idea using the same sort of data collection system described later. Early experiments 
indicated that, for a single motor driving a variety of loads, it is possible to distinguish 
926 T. PETSCHE, A. MARCANTONIO, C. DARKEN, S. J. HANSON, G. M. KUHN, I. SANTOSO 
Table 1: Loads for motors #1 and #2. 
Load type Load Magnitude 
constant 
sinusoidal oscillation at rotating frequency 
sinusoidal oscillation at twice the rotating frequency 
switching load (50% duty cycle) at rotating frequency 
sinusoidal oscillation 28 Hz 
sinusoidal oscillation at 30 Hz 
switching load (50% duty cycle) at 30 Hz 
half and full rated 
half and full rated 
full rated 
full rated 
half and full rated 
full rated 
full rated 
Table 2: Neural network classifier experiment. 
Features (N) 48 63 64 110 320 
Performance on motor #1 100% 100% 92% 100% 100% 
Performance on motor #2 30% 25% 55% 37% 
between a current spectrum obtained from the motor while it is healthy and another obtained 
when the motor contains a fault. Moreover, it is also possible to automatically generate a 
classifiers that correctly determine the presence or absence of a fault in the motor. 
The first, obvious approach to this monitoring task would seem to be to build a classifier 
that would be used to distinguish between a healthy motor and one that has developed a 
fault that is likely to lead to a breakdown. Unfortunately, this approach does not work. 
As described above, we have successfully built classifiers of various sorts using manual and 
automatic techniques to distinguish between current spectra obtained from a motor when it 
is healthy and those obtained when it contains a fault. 
However, since the SAMMS II will be connected to a motor before it fails and will be asked 
to identify a failure without ever seeing a labeled example of a failure from that motor, a 
classifier can only be used if it can be trained on data collected from one or more motors 
and then used to monitor the motor of interest. Unfortunately, experiments indicate that 
this will not work. 
One of these experiments is illustrated in table 2. Several feedforward neural network clas- 
sifiers were trained using examples from a single motor under four conditions: (1) healthy, 
(2) unbalanced, (3) containing a broken rotor bar and (4) containing a hole in the outer 
bearing race. The ten different loads listed in table 1 were applied to the motor for each of 
these conditions. 
The networks contained N inputs (where N is given in table 2); 9 hidden units and 4 
outputs. There were 40 training examples where each example is the average of 50 distinct 
magnitude scaled FFTs obtained from motor #1 from a single load/fault combination. The 
test data for which the results are reported in the table consisted of 40 averaged FFTs from 
motor #1 and 20 averaged FFTs (balanced and unbalanced only) from motor #2. The test 
set for motor #1 is completely distinct from the training set. 
In the case where n = 110, the FFT components were selected to include the frequencies 
identified by the theory of motor physics as interesting for the three fault conditions and 
exclude all other components. This led to an improvement over the other cases where a 
single contiguous set of components was chosen, but the performance still degrades to about 
random chance instead of 100%. 
This experiment clearly illustrates that is is possible to distinguish between healthy and 
faulty spectra obtained from the same motor. However, it also clearly illustrates that a 
A Neural Network Autoassociator for Induction Motor Failure Prediction 92 7 
Measurements .,._[ Novelty 
Adaptation 
Algorithm 
'-[ detection 
Novelty  Decision 
Data  
model 
Diagnosis 
Figure 1: The basic form of an anomaly detection system. 
classifier trained on one motor does not perform well on another motor since the error rates 
increase immensely. Based on results such as these, we have concluded that it is not feasible 
to build a single classi
