Learning to See Where and What: 
Training a Net to Make Saccades and Recognize 
Handwritten Characters 
Gale Martin, Mosfeq Rashid, David Chapman, and James Pittman 
MCC, 3500 Balcones Center Drive, Austin, Texas 78759 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes an approach to integrated segmentation and 
rof,ognition of hand-printed characters. The approach, called Saccade, 
integrates ballistic and corrective saccarles (eye movements) with 
character recognition. A single backpropagation net is trained to make 
a classification decision on a character centered in its input window, as 
well as to estimate the distance of the current and next character from the 
center of the input window. The net learns to accurately estimate these 
distances regardless of variations in character width, spacing between 
characters, writing style and other factors. During testing, the system 
uses the net-extracted classification and distance information, along 
with a set of jumping rules, to jump from character to character. 
The ability to read rests on multiple foundation skills. In learning how to read, people learn 
how to recognize individual characters centered in the visual field. They also learn how 
to move their eyes along a line of text, sequentially centering the visual field on successive 
characters. We believe that the key to developing optical character recognition (OCR) sys- 
tems that can mimic human reading capabilities, is to develop systems that can learn these 
and other skills in an integrated fashion. In this paper, we demonstrate that a backpropaga- 
tion net can learn to navigate along a line of handwritten characters, as well as to recognize 
the characters centered in its visual field. The system, called Saccade, extends the current 
state of the art in OCR technology by using a single classifier to accurately and efficiently 
locate and recognize characters, regardless of whether they touch each other or are sepa- 
rate. The Saccade system was described briefly at the last NIPS conference (Martin & Ra- 
shid, 1992). In this paper, we describe it more fully and report on results demonstrating 
its accuracy and efficiency in recognizing handwritten digits. 
The Saccade system takes a cue from the ballistic and corrective saccades (eye movements) 
of natural vision systems. Natural saccades make it possible to efficiently move from one 
informative area to another by jumping. The eye typically initiates a ballistic saccade to 
441 
442 Martin, Rashid, Chapman, and Pittman 
move the center of focus to the general area of interest, followed, if necessary, by one or 
more corrective saccades for fine-grained position corrections. Recognition processes are 
applied only at these multiple fixation points. 
We have copied some of these aspects in the artificial $accade system by training a neural 
network to know about the locations of characters in its input window, as well as to know 
about the identity of the character centered in its input window. During run-time, the Sac- 
cade system accesses this information computed by the net for successive input windows, 
along with a set of simple jumping rules, to yield an OCR system that jumps from character 
to character, classifying each character in a sequence. 
1 TRAINING DETAILS 
As shown in Figure 1, the Saccade system has a wide input window, large enough to contain 
No Centered Character 
Current character I 
Distance to current character, 
Distance to next character 
4Part 
Output 
Vector 
Backprop Net 
Figure 1. 
The Saccade system uses an enlarged input window and a 4-part 
output vector. 
several characters. Prior to training, each field image of a line of characters is labeled with 
the horizontal center position of each character in the field, as well as with the category of 
each character. During training, the input window slides horizontally across a field of char- 
acters, and at each position, the contents of the input window are paired with a four-part 
target ctput vector, the values of which are computed from the labeled information. The 
target values answer the following four questions about the contents of the input window: 
1. Is a character centered in the input window? 
2. What character is closest to the center of the window? 
3. How far off-center (horizontally) is the centermost character? 
4. How far is the next character to the right from the center of the window? 
The fh'st node in the output vector represents the no-centered-character state. It's target 
value is set high (e.g., 1.0) when the center of the input window falls between characters, 
Training a Net to Make Saccades and Recognize Handwritten Characters 443 
and set low (e.g., 0.0) when the center of the input window falls on the center of a character. 
When the net is trained, the value of the no-centered-character node indicates whether the 
input window is centered over a character, or whether a corrective saccade is needed to bet- 
ter center the character. 
The second part of the output vector contains a node for each character category. When 
the center of the input window falls on a character, the target value for its corresponding 
node is set high; otherwise it is set low. When the net is trained, the values in these nodes 
are used to classify the centered character. The target values for both the no-centered- 
character and the character-category nodes are defined continuously across the horizontal 
dimension as trapezoidal functions, such that there are plateaus surrounding the off and on 
positions, with linearly increasing and decreasing values connecting the plateaus. 
The third and fourth components of the output vector represent distance values, each en- 
coded in a distributed fashion across multiple nodes, using localized receptive fields 
(Moody & Darken, 1988). The FL,'St of these two parts represents the distance by which the 
character closest tothe center of the window is off-center. The target value can be positive, 
indicating that the center of the window is to the left of the center of character, or it can be 
negative, indicating that the center of the window has passed over the character, to the right 
of it's center. When trained, the value of the current-character-distance set of nodes is ac- 
cessed to determine the magnitude of a corrective saccade, to make a fine-grained position 
adjustment. 
The fourth component represents the distance from the center of the window to the center 
of the next character to the fight. The target value can only be positive. When trained, the 
value of this set of nodes is accessed to determine the magnitude of a ballistic saccade, to 
jump to the next character to the fight. 
It is important to note that for both distance components, the maximum target value can 
not exceed half the window width. The net is never trained to make a distance judgment 
that extends beyond its field of view, since it is not given any information about what exists 
outside of it's input window. For example, when the center of the next character to the right 
is positioned outside of the current input window, the distance value is set to the maximum 
value of half the window width. Since the distance values vary with different characters, 
different writers, and of course, at different positions with respect to a character, the net is 
forced to learn to use the visual characteristics particular to each window to estimate the 
distance values. In other words, the net does NOT simply learn average values for each 
of the two distance metrics. Moreover, as the results will show, the trained net does not 
seem to use simple density histogram cues to estimate the distance values. It is able to reli- 
ably estimate the distance values even when characters overlap, and hence would appear 
as a single clump in a density histogram. 
2 RUN-TIME SACCADE RULES 
During run-time, the labeled values are, of course, not available. The system uses the com- 
puted values in the character classification and distance components of the output vector, 
and some heuristics, to navigate horizontally along a character field, jumping from one 
character to the next, and occasionally making a corrective saccade to improve its ability 
to classify a character. When the net recognizes a character, it executes a ballistic saccade 
444 Martin, Rashid, Chapman, and Pittman 
to the next character, obtaining the distance to jump by g the next--character--dis- 
tance component of the output vector. When this action fails to center a character, as indi- 
cated by a low value in the no-centered--character output node, the system executes a cor- 
rective saccade to better center the character. It obtains the distance and direction to jump 
by reading the current--character-distance component of the output vector. Multiple cor- 
rective saccades can be executed. 
3 TESTING ON NIST HANDWRITTEN DIGIT FIELDS 
We tested the performance of the system on a set of hand-printed digits collected and dis- 
tributed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). This is a database 
containing 273,000 samples of handwritten numerals. Each of 2100 Census workers filled 
in a form with 33 fields, 28 fields of which only contain handwritten digits. The scanning 
resolution of the samples was 300 pixels/inch. The neural net was trained on about 80,000 
characters from 20,000 fields, written by 800 different individuals. The fields varied in 
length from 2 characters per field to 6 characters per field. The horizontal positions of each 
of the characters in these training-data fields were extracted by a person. The test data con- 
tained about 20,000 digits from 5,000 fields, written by a different group of 200 individuals. 
The test set was chosen to be this large because use of smaller test sets (e.g., 5,000 digits, 
1250 fields) yielded significant between-set variations in reported accuracy. Each field 
image was preprocessed to remove the box mound the field of ch
