Stationarity of Synaptic Coupling Strength Between 
Neurons with Nonstationary Discharge Properties 
Mark R. Sydorenko and Eric D. Young 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering & Center for Hearing Sciences 
The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine 
720 Rutland Avenue 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205 
Abstract 
Based on a general non-stationary point process model, we computed estimates of 
the synaptic coupling strength (efficacy) as a function of time after stimulus onset 
between an inhibitory interneuron and its target postsynaptic cell in the feline dorsal 
cochlear nucleus. The data consist of spike trains from pairs of neurons responding 
to brief tone bursts recorded in vivo. Our results suggest that the synaptic efficacy is 
non-stationary. Further, synaptic efficacy is shown to be inversely and 
approximately linearly related to average presynaptic spike rate. A second-order 
analysis suggests that the latter result is not due to non-linear interactions. Synaptic 
efficacy is less strongly correlated with postsynaptic rate and the correlation is not 
consistent across neural pairs. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this study was to investigate the dynamic properties of the inhibitory effect of 
type II neurons on type IV neurons in the cat dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN). Type IV cells 
are the principal (output) cells of the DCN and type II cells are inhibitory interneurons (Voigt 
& Young 1990). In particular, we examined the stationarity of the efficacy of inhibition of 
neural activity in a type IV neuron by individual action potentials (APs) in a type II neuron. 
Synaptic efficacy, or effectiveness, is defined as the average number of postsynaptic (type IV) 
APs eliminated per presynaptic (type II) AP. 
This study was motivated by the observation that post-stimulus time histograms of type IV 
neurons often show gradual recovery (buildup) from inhibition (Rhode et al. 1983; Young 
& Brownell 1976) which could arise through a weakening of inhibitory input over time. 
11 
12 Sydorenko and Young 
Correlograms of pairs of DCN units using long duration stimuli are reported to display 
inhibitory features (Voigt & Young 1980; Voigt & Young 1990) whereas correlograms using 
short stimuli are reported to show excitatory features (Gochin et al. 1989). This difference 
might result from nonstationarity of synaptic coupling. Finally, pharmacological results 
(Caspary et al. 1984) and current source-density analysis of DCN responses to electrical 
stimulation (Manis & Brownell 1983) suggest that this synapse may fatigue with activity. 
Synapfic efficacy was investigated by analyzing the statistical relationship of spike trains 
recorded simultaneously from pairs of neurons in vivo. We adopt a first order (linear) non- 
stationary point process model that does not impose a priori restrictions on the presynaptic 
process's distribution. Using this model, estimators of the postsynaptic impulse response to a 
presynaptic spike were derived using martingale theory and a method of moments approach. 
To study stationarity of synaptic efficacy, independent estimates of the impulse response 
were derived over a series of brief time windows spanning the stimulus duration. Average 
pre- and postsynaptic rate were computed for each window, as well. In this report, we 
summarize the results of analyzing the dependence of synaptic efficacy (derived from the 
impulse response estimates) on post-stimulus onset time, presynaptic average rate, 
postsynaptic average rate, and presaptic interspike interval. 
2 METHODS 
2.1 DATA COLLECTION 
Data were collected from unanesthetized cats that had been decerebrated at the level of the 
superior colliculus. We used a posterior approach to expose the DCN that did not require 
aspiration of brain tissue nor disruption of the local blood supply. Recordings were made 
using two platinum-iridium electrodes. 
The electrodes were advanced independently until a type II unit was isolated on one electrode 
and a type IV unit was isolated on the other electrode. Only pairs of units with best 
frequencies (BFs) within 20% were studied. The data consist of responses of the two units to 
500-4000 repetitions of a 100-1500 millisecond tone. The frequency of the tone was at the 
type II BF and the tone level was high enough to elicit activity in the type II unit for the 
duration of the presentation, but low enough not to inhibit the activity of the type IV unit 
(usually 5-10 dB above the type II threshold). Driven discharge rates of the two units ranged 
from 15 to 350 spikes per second. A silent recovery period at least four times longer than the 
tone burst duration followed each stimulus presentation. 
2.3 DATA ANALYSIS 
The stimulus duration is divided into 3 to 9 overlapping or non-overlapping time windows ('a' 
thru 'k' in figure 1). A separate impulse response estimate, presynapfic rate, and postsynaptic 
rate computation is made using only those type II and type IV spikes that fall within each 
window. The effectiveness of synaptic coupling during each window is calculated from the 
area bounded by the impulse response feature and the abscissa (shaded area in figure 1). The 
effectiveness measure has units of number of spikes. 
The synapfic impulse response is estimated using a non-stationary method of moments 
algorithm. The estimation algorithm is based on the model depicted in figure 2. The thick 
gray line encircles elements belonging to the postsynapfic (type IV) cell. The neural network 
surrounding the postsynaptic cell is modelled as a J-dimensional multivariate counting 
process. Each element of the J-dimensional counting process is an input to the postsynaptic 
Stationarity of Synaptic Coupling Strength Between Neurons 13 
cell. One of these input elements is the presynapfic (type II) cell under observation. The 
input processes modulate the postsynaptic cell's instantaneous rate function, ,j(t). Roughly 
speaking, (t) is the conditional firing probability of neuron j given the history of the input 
events up to time t. 
HISTOGRAM 
0 
SR 
a b 
Post-Stimulus Time 
0 
a b 
K:(t) 
TYPE IV PST 
HISTOGRAM 
I 
k. Post-StimulusTime 
Figure 1: Analysis of Non-stationary Synaptic Coupling 
Figure 2 
N.1 
The transformation K describes how the 
input processes influence ,j(t). We model 
this transformation as a linear sum of an 
intrinsic rate component and the contribution 
of all the presynaptic processes: 
Xj(t) = Koj(t)+k=, K,,(t,u) dNk(u) (1) 
where K0 describes the intrinsic rate and the 
K1 describe the impulse response of the 
postsynaptic cell in response to an input 
event. The output of the postsynaptic neuron 
is modeled as the integral of this rate 
function plus a mean-zero noise process, the 
innovation martingale (Bremaud 1981): 
Nj(t) = Xj(u)du + Mj(t). 
0 
(2) 
An algorithm for estimating the first order 
kernel, K1, was derived without assuming 
14 Sydorenko and Young 
anything about the distribution of the presynaptic process and without assuming stationary 
first or second order product densities (i.e., without assuming stationary rate or stationary 
auto-correlation). One or more such assumptions have been made in previous method of 
moments based algorithms for estimating neural interactions (Chomoboy et al. 1988 describe 
a maximum likelihood approach that does not require these assumptions). 
Since K1 is assumed to be stationary during the windowed interval (figure 1) while the 
process product densities are non-stationary (see PSTHs in figure 1), K1 is an average of 
separate estimates of K 1 computed at each point in time during the windowed interval: 
y. e) 
na ha-t=ta; teI (3) 
where K1 inside the summation is an estimate of the impulse response of neuron i at time t 
to a spike from neuron j at time t? (times are relative to stimulus onset); the digitization bin 
width A (= 0.3 msec in our case) determines the location of the discrete time points as well 
as the number of separate kernel estimates, n A, within the windowed interval, I. The time 
dependent kernel, KI(','), is computed by deconvolving the effects of the presynaptic process 
distribution, described by rii below, from the estimate of the cross-cumulant density, qij: 
where: 
r.ij tu ,v / = 9 '- 1 , 
uA, v 
3j(t?) -- #{spike in neuronj during [t-, t+-)}/(#{trials} A), 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
pij (t,t?) #{spike in i during tt-, tlx+-) and spike in j during tt-, 
{fls} a 2 (9) 
where b(.) is e dirac delta function; fd 1 me the D d inverse D, respectively; 
d {.} is e number of members in e set described iide e braces.  the presynaptic 
process is Poisson sbuted, expression (4) simplffies to: 
pj(tj) (10) 
Under mild (physiologically justffiable) conditions, e estimator given by (3) converges in 
quaatic me d yiel  ymptoficflly bi estimate of the e impulse response 
hncfion (in e generfl, (4), d Poisson presapfic process, (10), cases). 
3 RESULTS 
Figure 3 displays estimates of synaptic impulse response functions computed using traditional 
cross-correlation analysis and compares them to estimates computed using the method of 
moments algorithms descried above. (We use the definition of cross-correlation given by 
Voigt & Young 1990; equivalent to the function given by dividing expression (10) by 
Stationarity of Synaptic Coupling Strength Between Neurons 15 
expression (9) after averaging across all tj.) Figure 3A compares estimates computed from 
the responses of a real type II and type IV unit during the first 15 milliseconds of stimulation 
(where nonstationarity is greatest). Note that the cross-correlation estimate is distorted due to 
the nonstationarity of the underlying processes. This distortion leads to an overestimation of 
the effectiveness measure (shaded area) as compared to that yielded by the method of 
moments algorithm below. Figure 3B compares estimates computed using a simulated data 
set where the presynaptic neuron had regular (non-Poisson) disch
