Reorganisation of Somatosensory Cortex after 
Tactile Training 
Rasmus S. Petersen John G. Taylor 
Centre for Neural Networks, King's College London 
Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK 
Abstract 
Topographic maps in primary areas of mammalian cerebral cortex reor- 
ganise as a result of behavioural training. The nature of this reorgani- 
sation seems consistent with the behaviour of competitive neural net- 
works, as has been demonstrated in the past by computer simulation. 
We model tactile training on the hand representation in primate somato- 
sensory cortex, using the Neural Field Theory of Amari and his col- 
leagues. Expressions for changes in both receptive field size and mag- 
nification factor are derived, which are consistent with owl monkey ex- 
periments and make a prediction which goes beyond them. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The primary cortical areas of mammals are now known to be plastic throughout life; re- 
viewed recently by Kaas(1995). The problem of how and why the underlying learning 
processes work is an exciting one, for which neural network modelling appears well 
suited. In this contribution, we model the long-term effects of tactile training (Jenkins et 
al, 1990) on the functional organisation of monkey primary somatosensory cortex, by 
perturbing a topographic net (Takeuchi and Amari, 1979). 
1.1 ADAPTATION IN ADULT SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX 
Light touch activates skin receptors which in primates are mapped, largely topographi- 
cally, in area 3b. In a series of papers, Merzenich and colleagues describe how area 3b 
becomes reorganised following peripheral nerve damage (Merzenich et al, 1983a; 1983b) 
or digit amputation (Merzenich et al, 1984). The underlying learning processes may also 
explain the phenomenon of phantom limb telescoping (Haber, 1955). Recent advances 
in brain scanning are beginning to make them observable even in the human brain 
(Mogilner et al, 1993). 
1.2 ADAPTATION ASSOCIATED WITH TACTILE TRAINING 
Jenkins et al trained owl monkeys to maintain contact with a rotating disk. The apparatus 
was arranged so that success eventually involved touching the disk with only the digit 
tips. Hence these regions received selective stimulation. Some time after training had 
been completed electro-physiological recordings were made from area 3b. These re- 
vealed an increase in Magnification Factor (MF) for the stimulated skin and a decrease in 
Reorganization of Somatosensory Cortex after Tactile Training 83 
the size of Receptive Fields (RFs) for that region. The net territory gained for light touch 
of the digit tips came from area 3a and/or the face region of area 3b, but details of any 
changes in these representations were not reported. 
2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
2.1 PREVIOUS WORK 
Takeuchi and Amari(1979), Ritter and Schulten(1986), Pearson et a1(1987) and Grajski 
and Merzenich(1990) have all modelled amputation/denervation by computer simulation 
of competitive neural networks with various Hebbian weight dynamics. Grajski and 
Merzenich(1990) also modelled the data of Jenkins et al. We build on this research 
within the Neural Field Theor), framework (Amari, 1977; Takeuchi and Amari, 1979; 
Amari, 1980) of the Neural Activity Model of Willshaw and von der Malsburg(1976). 
2.2 NEURAL ACTIVITY MODEL 
Consider a cortical network of simple, laterally connected neurons. Neurons sum in- 
puts linearly and output a sigmoidal function of this sum. The lateral connections are 
excitatory at short distances and inhibitory at longer ones. Such a network is competi- 
tive: the steady state consists of blobs of activity centred around those neurons locally re- 
ceiving the greatest afferent input (Amari, 1977). The range of the competition is limited 
by the range of the lateral inhibition. 
Suppose now that the afferent synapses adapt in a Hebbian manner to stimuli that are 1o- 
calised in the sensory array; the lateral ones are fixed. Willshaw and von der Mals- 
burg(1976) showed by computer simulation that this network is able to form a topo- 
graphic map of the sensory array. Takeuchi and Amari(1979) amended the Willshaw- 
Malsburg model slightly: neurons possess an adaptive firing threshold in order to prevent 
synaptic weight explosion, rather than the more usual mechanism of weight normalisa- 
tion. They proved that a topographic mapping is stable under certain conditions. 
2.3 TAKEUCHI-AMARI THEORY 
Consider a one-dimensional model. 
oau(x, y,t) 
The membrane dynamics are: 
- u(x,y,t)+  s(x,y' ,t)a(y- y' )dy'- 
So(X,t)a o +  w(x- x')f[u(x' , y,t)]dx' - h 
(1) 
Here u(x,y,t) is the membrane potential at time t for point x when a stimulus centred at y is 
being presented; h is a positive resting potential; w(z) is the lateral inhibitory weight be- 
tween two points in the neural field separated by a distance z - positive for small IzI and 
negative for larger IzI; s(x,y,t) is the excitatory synaptic weight from y to x at time t and 
so(x,t) is an inhibitory weight from a tonically active inhibitory input ao to x at time t - it is 
the adaptive firing threshold. f[u] is a binary threshold function that maps positive mem- 
brane potentials to 1 and non-positive ones to 0. 
Idealised, point-like stimuli are assumed, which spread out somewhat on the sensory 
surface or subcortically. The spreading process is assumed to be independent of y and is 
described in the same coordinates. It is represented by the function aO'-y'), which de- 
scribes the effect of a point input at y spreading to the point y'. This is a decreasing, posi- 
tive, symmetric function of b'-y'l. With this type of input, the steady-state activity of the 
network is a single blob, 1ocalised around the neuron with maximum afferent input. 
84 R.S. PETERSEN, J. G. TAYLOR 
The afferent synaptic weights adapt in a leaky Hebbian manner but with a time constant 
much larger than that of the membrane dynamics (1). Effectively this means that learning 
occurs on the steady state of the membrane dynamics. The following averaged weight 
dynamics can be justified (Takeuchi and Amari, 1979; Geman 1979): 
os(x, y,t) 
O3So(X, y,t) 
= -s(x, y,,)+ bf p(y')a(y- y' )fitS(x, y' )]dy' 
- -s o (x, y,t)+ b' a 0  p(y' )fitS(x, y' )]dy' 
(2) 
where ti(x,y') is the steady-state of the membrane dynamics at x given a stimulus at y' and 
PO) is the probability of a stimulus at y'; b, b' are constants. 
Empirically, the classical Receptive Field (RF) of a neuron is defined as the region of 
the input field within which localised stimulation causes change in its activity. This con- 
cept can be modelled in neural field theory as: the RF of a neuron at x is the portion of the 
input field within which a stimulus evokes a positive membrane potential (inhibitory RFs 
are not considered). If the neural field is a continuous map of the sensory surface then the 
RF of a neuron is fully described by its two borders r(x), r2(x), defined formally: 
i}(x, ri(x))=O i=1,2 (3) 
which are illustrated in figure 1. 
Let RF size and RF position be denoted respectively by the functions r(x) and m(x), which 
represent experimentally measurable quantities. In terms of the border functions they can 
be expressed: 
r(x)=r2(x)-q(x) 
m(x) = -(q (x)+ r 2 (x)) 
(4) 
Y 
r(xo) { 
X 0 
r2(x0) 
h(xo) 
/ 
Figure 1: RF 
boundaries as a 
function of position 
in the neural field, 
for a topographi- 
cally ordered net- 
work. Only the re- 
gion in-between 
r(x) and r2(x) has 
positive steady- 
state membrane 
potential a(x,y). 
r(x) and r2(x) are 
defined by the 
condition 
t(X, ri(x))-'O for 
i-1,2. 
Using (1), (2) and the definition (3), Takeuchi and Amari(1979) derived dynamical equa- 
tions for the change in RF borders due to learning. In the case of uniform stimulus prob- 
ability, they found solutions for the steady-state RF border functions. With periodic 
boundary conditions, the basic solution is a linear map with constant RF size: 
Reorganization of Somatosensory Cortex after Tactile Training 85 
r(x) = r 0 = const 
m(x) = px + r o 
rF (x) = pX + ro 
(5) 
This means that both RF size and activity blob size are uniform across the network and 
that RF position m(x) is a linear function of network location. (The value of p is deter- 
mined by boundary conditions; ro is then determined from the joint equilibrium of (1), 
(2)). The inverse of the RF position function, denoted by m-(y), is the centre of the corti- 
cal active region caused by a stimulus centred at y. The change in m-O ,) over a unit inter- 
val in the input field is, by empirical definition, the cortical magnification factor (MF). 
Here we model MF as the rate of change of m-(y). The MF for the system described by 
(5) is: 
d 
m - (y)= p- (6) 
3. ANALYSIS OF TACTILE TRAINING 
3.1 TRAINING MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS 
Jenkins et al's training sessions caused an increase in the relative frequency of stimulation 
to the finger tips, and hence a decrease in relative frequency of stimulation elsewhere. 
Over a long time, we can express this fact as a 1ocalised change in stimulus probability 
(figure 2). (This is not sufficient to cause cortical reorganisation - Recanzone et al(1992) 
showed that attention to the stimulation is vital. We consider only attended stimulation in 
this model). To account for such data it is clearly necessary to analyse non-uniform 
stimulus probabilities, which demands extending the results of Takeuchi and Amari. Un- 
fortunately, it seems to be hard to obtain general results. However, a perturbation analy- 
sis around the uniform probability solution (5) is possible. 
To proceed in this way, we must be able to assume that the change in the stimulus prob- 
ability density function away from uniformity is small. This reasoning is expressed by the 
following equation: 
P(Y)= P0 + 
(7) 
where p(y) is the new stimulus probability in terms of the uniform one and a perturbation 
due to training: e is a small constant. The effect of the perturbation is to ease the weight 
dynamics (2) awa
