A 
Neural Network Model of 3-D 
Lightness Perception 
Luiz Pessoa 
Federal Univ. of Rio de Janeiro 
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil 
pessoa@cos.ufrj.br 
William D. Ross 
Boston University 
Boston, MA 02215 
bill@cns.bu.edu 
Abstract 
A neural network model of 3-D lightness perception is presented 
which builds upon the FACADE Theory Boundary Contour Sys- 
tem/Feature Contour System of Grossberg and colleagues. Early 
ratio encoding by retinal ganglion neurons as well as psychophysi- 
cal results on constancy across different backgrounds (background 
constancy) are used to provide functional constraints to the theory 
and suggest a contrast negation hypothesis which states that ratio 
measures between coplanar regions are given more weight in the 
determination of lightness of the respective regions. Simulations 
of the model address data on lightness perception, including the 
coplanar ratio hypothesis, the Benary cross, and White's illusion. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Our everyday visual experience includes surface color constancy. That is, despite 1) 
variations in scene lighting and 2) movement or displacement across visual contexts, 
the color of an object appears to a large extent to be the same. Color constancy 
refers, then, to the fact that surface color remains largely constant despite changes 
in the intensity and composition of the light reflected to the eyes from both the 
object itself and from surrounding objects. This paper discusses a neural network 
model of 3D lightness perception -- i.e., only the achromatic or black to white 
dimension of surface color perception is addressed. More specifically, the problem 
of background constancy (see 2 above) is addressed and mechanisms to accomplish 
it in a system exhibiting illumination constancy (see i above) are proposed. 
A landmark result in the study of lightness was an experiment reported by Wal- 
lach (1948) who showed that for a disk-annulus pattern, lightness is given by the 
ratio of disk and annulus luminances (i.e., independent of overall illumination); the 
A Neural Network Model of 3-D Lightness Perception 845 
so-called ratio principle. In another study, Whittle and Challands (1969) had sub- 
jects perform brightness matches in a haploscopic display paradigm. A striking 
result was that subjects always matched decrements to decrements, or increments 
to increments, but never increments to decrements. Whittle and Challands' (1969) 
results provide psychophysical support to the notion that the early visual system 
codes luminance ratios and not absolute luminance. These psychophysical results 
are in line with results from neurophysiology indicating that cells at early stages 
of the visual system encode local luminance contrast (Shapley and Enroth-Cugell, 
1984). Note that lateral inhibition mechanisms are sensitive to local ratios and can 
be used as part of the explanation of illumination constancy. 
Despite the explanatory power of the ratio principle, and the fact that the early 
stages of the visual system likely code contrast, several experiments have shown that, 
in general, ratios are insufficient to account for surface color perception. Studies 
of background constancy (Whittle and Challands, 1969; Land and McCann, 1971; 
Arend and Spehar, 1993), of the role of 3-D spatial layout and illumination arrange- 
ment on lightness perception (e.g., Gilchrist, 1977) as well as many other effects, 
argue against the sufficiency of local contrast measures (e.g., Benary cross, White's, 
1979 illusion). The neural network model presented here addresses these data using 
several fields of neurally plausible mechanisms of lateral inhibition and excitation. 
2 FROM LUMINANCE RATIOS TO LIGHTNESS 
The coplanar ratio hypothesis (Gilchrist, 1977) states that the lightness of a given 
region is determined predominantly in relation to other coplanar surfaces, and not 
by equally weighted relations to all retinally adjacent regions. We propose that in 
the determination of lightness, contrast measures between non-coplanar adjacent 
surfaces are partially negated in order to preserve background constancy. 
Consider the Benary Cross pattern (input stimulus in Fig. 2). If the gray patch on 
the cross is considered to be at the same depth as the cross, while the other gray 
patch is taken to be at the same depth as the background (which is below the cross), 
the gray patch on the cross should look lighter (since its lightness is determined 
in relation to the black cross), and the other patch darker (since its lightness is 
determined in relation to the white background). White's (1979) illusion can be 
discussed in similar terms (see the input stimulus in Fig. 3). 
The mechanisms presented below implement a process of partial contrast negation in 
which the initial retinal contrast code is modulated by depth information such that 
the retinal contrast consistent with the depth interpretation is maintained while the 
retinal contrast not supported by depth is negated or attenuated. 
3 A FILLING-IN MODEL OF 3-D LIGHTNESS 
Contrast/Filling-in models propose that initial measures of boundary contrast fol- 
lowed by spreading of neural activity within filling-in compartments produce a re- 
sponse profile isomorphic with the percept (Gerrits &; Vendrik, 1970; Cohen &; 
Grossberg, 1984; Grossberg &; Todorovid, 1988; Pessoa, Mingolla, &; Neumann, 
1995). In this paper we develop a neural network model of lightness perception in 
the tradition of contrast/filling-in theories. The neural network developed here is an 
extension of the Boundary Contour System/Feature Contour System (BCS/FCS) 
proposed by Cohen and Grossberg (1984) and Grossberg and Mingolla (1985) to 
explain 3-D lightness data. 
846 L. PESSOA, W. D. ROSS 
A fundamental idea of the BCS/FCS theory is that lateral inhibition achieves illumi- 
nation constancy but requires the recovery of lightness by the filling-in, or diffusion, 
of featural quality (lightness in our case). The final diffused activities correspond 
to lightness, which is the outcome of interactions between boundaries and fenrural 
quality, whereby boundaries control the process of filling-in by forming gates of 
variable resistance to diffusion. 
How can the visual system construct 3-D lightness percepts from contrast measures 
obtained by retinotopic lateral inhibition ? A mechanism that is easily instantiated in 
a neural model and provides a straightforward modification to the contrast/filling- 
in proposal of Grossberg and Todorovi (1988) is the use of depth-gated filling-in. 
This can be accomplished through a pathway that modulates boundary strength 
for boundaries between surfaces or objects across depth. The use of permeable 
or leaky boundaries was also used by Grossberg and Todorovi (1988) for 2-D 
stimuli. In the current usage, permeability is actively increased at depth boundaries 
to partially negate the contrast effect -- since filling-in proceeds more freely -- and 
thus preserve lightness constancy across backgrounds. Figure i describes the four 
computational stages of the system. 
INPUT 
ON/OFF J 
FILTERING 
BOUNDARIES 
 J FILLING-IN J 
MAP 
Figure 1: Model components. 
Stage 1: Contrast Measurement. At this stage both ON and OFF neural fields 
with lateral inhibitory connectivity measure the strength of contrast at image re- 
gions -- in uniform regions a contrast measurement of zero results. Formally, the 
ON field is given by 
dYi -oy + (l?  +'C + -(y + ')')E (1) 
dt - - Yij ) ij 
where c, fl and 7 are constants; C/ is the total excitatory input to y/ and E/ is the 
total inhibitory input to y/. These terms denote discrete convolutions of the input 
Iij with Gaussian weighting functions, or kernels. An analogous equation specifies 
y for the OFF field. Figure 2 shows the ON-contrast minus the OFF-contrast. 
Stage 2: 2-D Boundary Detection. At Stage 2, oriented odd-symmetric bound- 
ary detection cells are excited by the oriented sampling of the ON and OFF Stage 1 
cells. Responses are maximal when ON activation is strong on one side of a cell's 
receptive field and OFF activation is strong on the opposite side. In other words, 
the cells are tuned to ON/OFF contrast co-occurrence, or juxtaposition (see Pessoa 
et al., 1995). The output at this stage is the sum of the activations of such cells at 
each location for all orientations. The output responses are sharpened and localized 
through lateral inhibition across space; an equation similar to Equation i is used. 
The final output of Stage 2 is given by the signals zij (see Fig. 2, Boundaries). 
Stage 3: Depth Map. In the current implementation a simple scheme was em- 
ployed for the determination of the depth configuration. Initially, four types of 
A Neural Network Model of 3-D Lightness Perception 84 7 
T-junction cells detect such configurations in the image. For example, 
T.i = z  _ ,t. i x z i + <.i x z  ,.i + , , (2) 
where d is a constant, detects T-junctions, where left, right, and top positions of the 
boundary stage are active; similar cells detect T-junctions of different orientations. 
The activities of the T-junction cells are then used in conjunction with boundary 
signals to define complete boundaries. Filling-in within these depth boundaries 
results in a depth map (see Fig. 2, Depth Map). 
Stage 4: Depth-modulated Filling-in. In Stage 4, the ON and orr contrast 
measures are allowed to diffuse across space within respective filling-in regions. Dif- 
fusion is blocked by boundary activations from Stage 2 (see Grossberg & Todorovid, 
1988, for details). The diffusion process is further modulated by depth information. 
The depth map provides this information; different activities code different depths. 
In a full blown implementation of the model, depth information would be obtained 
by the depth segmentation of the image supported by both binocular disparity and 
monocular depth cues. 
Depth-modulated filling-in is such that boundaries
