A Novel Approach to Prediction of the 
3-Dimensional Structures of Protein Backbones 
by Neural Networks 
Henrik Fredholm 1,s 
and 
Henrik Bohr 2, Jakob Bohr 3, S0ren Brunak 4, 
Rodney M.J. Cotterill 4, Benny Lautrup a and Steffen B. Petersen 1 
1MR-Senteret, SINTEF, N-7034 Trondheim, Norway. 
2University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 
3Ris0 National Laboratory, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. 
4Technical Univ. of Denmark, B. 307, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark. 
aNiels Bohr Institute, Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Cph. O, Denmark. 
Abstract 
Three-dimensional (3D) structures of protein backbones have been pre- 
dicted using neural networks. A feed forward neural network was trained 
on a class of functionally, but not structurally, homologous proteins, us- 
ing backpropagation learning. The network generated tertiary structure 
information in the form of binary distance constraints for the C, atoms 
in the protein backbone. The binary distance between two C, atoms was 
0 if the distance between them was less than a certain threshold distance, 
and 1 otherwise. The distance constraints predicted by the trained neu- 
ral network were utilized to generate a folded conformation of the protein 
backbone, using a steepest descent minimization approach. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
One current aim of molecular biology is determination of the (3D) tertiary struc- 
tures of proteins in their folded native state from their sequences of amino acid 
523 
524 Fredholm, Bohr, Bohr, Brunak, Cotterill, Lautrup, and ltersen 
residues. Since Kendrew & Perutz solved the first protein structures, myoglobin 
and hemoglobin, and explained from the discovered structures how these proteins 
perform their function, it has been widely recognized that protein function is inti- 
mately linked with protein structure[1]. 
Within the last two decades X-ray crystallographers have solved the 3-dimensional 
(3D) structures of a steadily increasing number of proteins in the crystalline state, 
and recently 2D-NMR spectroscopy has emerged as an alternative method for small 
proteins in solution. Today approximately three hundred 3D structures have been 
solved by these methods, although only about half of them can be considered as 
truly different, and only around a hundred of them are solved at high resolution 
(that is, less than 2.,). The number of protein sequences known today is well over 
20,000, and this number seems to be growing at least one order of magnitude faster 
than the number of known 3D protein structures. 
Obviously, it is of great importance to develop tools that can predict structural 
aspects of proteins on the basis of knowledge acquired from known 3D structures. 
1.1 THE PROTEIN FOLDING PROBLEM 
It is generally accepted that most aspects of protein structure derive from the prop- 
erties of the particular sequence of amino acids that make up the protein 1. The 
classical experiment is that of Anfinsen e! al. [2] who demonstrated that ribonucle- 
ase could be denatured and refolded without loss of enzymatic activity. 
This has led to the formulation of the so-called protein folding problem: given the 
sequence of amino acids of a protein, what will be its native folded conformation? 
1.2 SECONDARY STRUCTURE PREDICTION 
Several methods have been developed for protein structure prediction. Most abun- 
dant are the methods for protein secondary structure prediction [3, 4, 5, 6]. These 
methods predict for each amino acid in the protein sequence what type of secondary 
structure the amino acid is part of. Several strategies have been suggested, most 
of which are based on statistical analysis of the occurrence of single amino acids 
or very short stretches of amino acids in secondary structural elements in known 
proteins. In general, these prediction schemes have a prediction accuracy of 50-60% 
for a three-category prediction of helix-, sheet- and coil conformations. 
Recently neural networks have been applied to secondary structure prediction with 
encouraging results [7, 8, 9, 10]; on three-category prediction the accuracy is 65%; 
on two-catagory prediction of helix- and coil conformations the accuracy is 73%; 
and on a two-category prediction of turn- and coil conformations the accuracy is 
71%. In all the three cases this is an improvement of the traditional methods. 
Although recent results indicate that certain proteins catalyze, but do not alter, the 
course of protein folding. 
A Novel Approach to Prediction of the 3-Dimensional Structures 525 
1.3 TERTIARY STRUCTURE PREDICTION 
The methods that exist for 3D structure prediction fall in three broad categories: (1) 
use of sequence homology with other protein with know 3D structure; (2) prediction 
of secondary structure units followed by the assembly of these units into a compact 
structure; and (3) use of empirical energy functions ab initio to derive the 3D 
structure. 
No general method for 3D structure prediction exists today, and novel methods 
are most often documented through case stories that illustrate best or single case 
performance. The most successful methods so far has been those based on sequence 
hornology; if significant sequence and functional hornology exists between a protein 
of interest and proteins for which the 3D structures are known, it is possible (but 
cumbersome) to build a reasonable 3D model of the protein structure. 
2 METHOD 
We here describe a new method for predicting the 3D structure of a protein backbone 
from its amino acid sequence [11]. The main idea behind this approach is to use a 
noise tolerant representation of the protein backbone that is invariant to rotation 
and translation of the backbone 2, and then train a neural network to map protein 
sequences to this representation. 
2.1 REPRESENTATION OF 3D BACKBONE STRUCTURES 
The folded backbone structure of a protein brings residues that are distantly posi- 
tioned in sequence close to each other in space. One may identify such close contacts 
and use them as constraints on the backbone conformation. 
We define the binary distance D(i,j) between two residues i and j as 0 if the 
distance between the Ca atom in residue i and the Ca atom in residue j is less than 
a given threshold and as I if it is above or equal to the threshold, a typical choice 
of threshold being 8. Organizing these distances as a binary distance matrix gives 
rise to a two dimensional representation of the protein backbone (figure 2a depict 
such matrix). 
Most secondary motifs can be distinguished in this representation; helices appear 
as thickenings of the diagonal and anti-parallel and parallel sheets appear as stripes 
orthogonal and parallel to the diagonal. 
It is possible to reconstruct the 3D backbone from the binary distance matrix rep- 
resentation by minimizing the energy function, 
E = - g(dq( I 0(i) - 
where dis = 1 - 2D(i,j), g(x) = 1/(1 + exp(-x)) and 0 is the distance threshold. 
The initial positions of the 0a atoms are chosen at random. The motif for this 
2The (6,b) torsion-angle representation is also rotation- and translation invariant, but 
it is not noise tolerant. 
526 Fredholm, Bohr, Bohr, Brunak, Cotterill, Lautrup, and ltersen 
$equnc of ammo accts 
0 I 
'o 
Hidden 
Figure 1: The input to the network consists of 61 contiguous amino acids, where each 
amino acid is represented by a group of 20 neurons (only seven neurons/group are illus- 
trated). At the output layer, a set of binary distances, between the centrally positioned 
residue and those lying to the left of it in the input window, is produced. Secondary 
structure assignment for the centrally positioned residue, in the three categories of helix, 
sheet and coil, is also produced. Regarding the binary distance matrix, the network is 
trained to report which of the 30 preceding C'o atoms are positioned within a distance of 
8 to the centrally placed amino acid. The input layer had 1220 (61 x 20) neurons, the 
hidden layer had 300 neurons and the output layer had '33 neurons. 
energy function is that constraints that do not hold should contribute with large 
values, while constraints that do hold should contribute with small values. 
For small proteins of the order of 60 residues the reconstruction is very accurate. 
For Bovine Pancreatic Trypsin Inhibitor (6PTI), a 56 residue long protein, we were 
able to generate a correctly folded backbone structure. The binary distance matrix 
was generated from the crystallographic data of 6PTI using a distance threshold 
of 8A. After convergence of the minimization procedure the errors between the 
reconstructed structure and the correct structure lay within 1.2 root mean square 
Preliminary results (unpublished) indicate that backbone structures for larger pro- 
teins can be reconstructed with a deviation from the correct structure down to 2t 
rms, when a distance threshold of 16 is used. When 5% random noise is added to 
the distance matrix the deviation from the correct structure grows to 4-5 rrns. 
2.2 DISTANCE MATRIX PREDICTION 
A backpropagation network [12] was used to map protein sequences to distance 
matrices. To simplify the task the neural network had to learn, it was not taught 
to predict all constraints in the distance matrix. Only a band along the diagonal 
was to be predicted. More specifically, the network was taught to predict for each 
residue in the protein sequence the binary distances to the 30 previous residues. 
Furthermore it had to classify the central residue in question as either helix, sheet 
or coil, see figure 1. Hence, the trained neural network produced, when given a 
protein sequence, a secondary structure prediction and a distance matrix containing 
A Novel Approach to Prediction of the 3-Dimensional Structures 527 
! RESIDUE NUMBER 223 i RESIDUE NUMBER 223 
(a) (b) 
Figure 2: Binary distance matrices for 1TRM. The matrices (223 x 223) show which 
Ca atoms are within an 8A distance to each other C, atom in the folded protein. a) The 
matrix corr
