Instabilities in Eye Movement Control: A Model 
of Periodic Alternating Nystagmus 
Ernst R. Dow 
Center for Biophysics and 
Computational Biology, 
Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign,Urbana, IL 61801. 
edow@uiuc.edu 
Thomas J. Anastasio 
Department of Molecular and Integra- 
tive Physiology, Center for Biophysics 
and Computational Biology, 
Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801. 
tstasio@uiuc.edu 
Abstract 
Nystagmus is a pattern of eye movement characterized by smooth rota- 
tions of the eye in one direction and rapid rotations in the opposite di- 
rection that reset eye position. Periodic alternating nystagmus (PAN) is 
a form of uncontrollable nystagmus that has been described as an un- 
stable but amplitude-limited oscillation. PAN has been observed previ- 
ously only in subjects with vestibulo-cerebellar damage. We describe 
results in which PAN can be produced in normal subjects by prolonged 
rotation in darkness. We propose a new model in which the neural cir- 
cuits that control eye movement are inherently unstable, but this insta- 
bility is kept in check under normal circumstances by the cerebellum. 
Circumstances which alter this cerebellar restraint, such as vestibulo- 
cerebellar damage or plasticity due to rotation in darkness, can lead to 
PAN. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Visual perception involves not only an operating visual sensory system, but also the abil- 
ity to control eye movements. The oculomotor subsystems provide eye movement con- 
trol. For example, the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) maintains retinal image stability by 
making slow-phase eye rotations that counterbalance head rotations, making it possible to 
move and see at the same time (Wilson and Melvill Jones, 1979). The VOR makes slow- 
phase eye rotations that are directed opposite to head rotations. When these ongoing 
slow-phase eye rotations are interrupted by fast-phase eye rotations that reset eye posi- 
tion, the resulting eye movement pattern is called nystagmus. Periodic alternating nys- 
A Model of Periodic Alternating Nystagrnus 139 
tagmus (PAN) is a congenital or acquired eye movement disorder characterized by un- 
controllable nystagmus that alternates direction roughly sinusoidally with a period of 200 
s to 400 s (Baloh et al., 1976; Leigh et al., 1981; Furman et al., 1990). Furman and col- 
leagues (1990) have determined that PAN in humans is caused by lesions of parts of the 
vestibulo-cerebellum known as the nodulus and uvula (NU). Lesions to the NU cause 
PAN in the dark (Waespe et al., 1985; Angelaki and Hess, 1995). NU lesions also pre- 
vent habituation (Singleton, 1967; Waespe et al, 1985; Torte et al., 1994), which is a 
semi-permanent decrease in the gain (eye velocity / head velocity) of the VOR response 
that can be brought about by prolonged low-frequency rotational stimulation in the dark. 
Vestibulo-cerebellectomy in habituated goldfish causes VOR dishabituation (Dow and 
Anastasio, 1996). Temporary inactivation of the vestibulo-cerebellum in habituated gold- 
fish causes temporary dishabituation and can result in a temporary PAN (Dow and An- 
astasio, in press). Stimulation of the NU temporarily abolish the VOR response 
(Fernandez and Fredrickson, 1964). Cerebellar influence on the VOR may be mediated 
by connections between the NU and vestibular nucleus neurons, which have been demon- 
strated in many species (Dow, 1936; 1938). 
We have previously shown that intact goldfish habituate to prolonged low-frequency 
(0.01 Hz) rotation (Dow and Anastasio, 1996) and that rotation at higher frequencies 
(0.05-0.1 Hz) causes PAN (Dow and Anastasio, 1997). We also proposed a limit-cycle 
model of PAN in which habituation or PAN result from an increase or decrease, respec- 
tively, of the inhibition of the vestibular nuclei by the NU. This model suggested that 
velocity storage, which functions to increase low-frequency VOR gain above the bio- 
physical limits of the semicircular canals (Robinson, 1977;1981), is mediated by a poten- 
tially unstable low-frequency resonance. This instability is normally kept in check by 
constant suppression by the NU. 
2 METHODS 
PAN was studied in intact, experimentally naive, comet goldfish (carassius auratus). 
Each goldfish was restrained horizontally underwater with the head at the center of a cy- 
lindrical tank. Eye movements were measured using the magnetic search coil technique 
(Robinson, 1963). For technical details see Dow and Anastasio (1996). The tank was 
centered on a horizontal rotating platform. Goldfish were rotated continuously for vari- 
ous durations (30 min to 2 h) in darkness at various single frequencies (0.03 - 0.17 Hz). 
Some data have been previously reported (Dow and Anastasio, 1997). All stimuli had 
peak rotational velocities of 60 deg/s. Eye posi[ion and rotator (i.e. head) velocity signals 
were digitized for analysis. Eye position data were digitally differentiated to compute eye 
velocity and fast-phases were removed. Data were analyzed and simulated using MAT- 
LAB and SIMULINK (The Mathworks, Inc.). 
3 RESULTS 
Prolonged rotation in darkness at frequencies which produced some habituation in naive 
goldfish (0.03-0.17 Hz) could produce a lower-frequency oscillation in slow-phase eye 
velocity that was superimposed on the normal VOR response (fig 1). This lower- 
frequency oscillation produced a periodic alternating nystagmus (PAN). When PAN oc- 
curred, it was roughly sinusoidal and varied in period, amplitude, and onset-time. Ha- 
bituation could occur simultaneously with PAN (fig lB) or habituation could completely 
140 E. R. Dow and T. J. Anastasio 
60[ Initial response 
20 
-20 
-40 
&-60 
=--- 50 
60 
4O 
2O 
0 
-20 
-40 
-60 
YVT V 
I I 
VVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV 
Response after I h. rotation 
ivey ,vtvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv 
B 
I I I I 
-' _5oVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV/, 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 
time (s) 
Figure 1: Initial 1000 s 0.05 Hz rotation showing PAN (A). Slow-phase 
eye velocity shows that PAN starts almost immediately and there is a 
slight reduction in VOR gain after 1000 s. Following 1 h continuous ro- 
tation in the same goldfish (B), VOR gain has decreased. 
suppress PAN (fig 4). PAN observed at lower frequencies (0.03 and 0.05 Hz) typically 
decreased in amplitude as rotation continued. 
Previous work has shown that PAN was most likely to occur during prolonged rotations at 
frequencies between 0.05 and 0ol Hz (Dow and Anastasio, 1997). At these frequencies, 
habituation also caused a slight decrease in VOR gain (1.3 to 1.8 times, initial gain / final 
gain) following 1 h of rotation. At higher frequencies, neither habituation nor PAN were 
observed. At lower frequencies (0.03 Hz) PAN could occur before habituation substan- 
tially reduced VOR gain (fig 4). PAN, was not observed in naive goldfish rotated a lower 
frequency (0.01 Hz) where VOR gain fell by 22 times due to habituation (Dow and An- 
astasio, 1997). 
A Model of Periodic Alternating Nystagmus 141 
4 MODEL 
Previously, a non-linear limit cycle model was constructed by Leigh, Robinson, and Zee 
(1981; see also Furman, 1989) to simulate PAN in humans. This model included a ve- 
locity storage loop with saturation, and a central adaptation loop. This second order sys- 
tem would spontaneously oscillate, producing PAN, if the gain of the velocity storage 
loop was greater than 1. 
We adjusted Robinson's model to simulate rotation inducible PAN and habituation in the 
goldfish. Input to and output from the model (fig 2) represent head and slow-phase eye 
velocity, respectively. The time constants of the canal (s%/(s%+1)) and velocity-storage 
(gs/(s%+l)) elements were set to the value of the canal time constant as determined ex- 
perimentally in goldfish (% = Xs = 3 s) (Hartman and Klinke, 1980). The time constant of 
the central adaptation element (US'Ca) was 10 times longer (Xa = 30 s). The Laplace vari- 
able (s) is complex frequency (s =j(o where/is -1 and (o is frequency in rad/s). The gain 
of the velocity-storage loop (gs) is 1.05 while that of the central adaptation loop (ga) is 1. 
The central adaptation loop represents in part a negative feedback loop onto vestibular 
nucleus neurons through inhibitory Purkinje cells of the NU. The vestibulo-cerebellum is 
known to modulate the gain of the VOR (Wilson and Melvill Jones, 1979). The static 
nonlinearity in the velocity storage loop consists of a threshold (+ 0.0225) and a satura- 
tion (+ 1.25). The threshold was added to model the decay in PAN following termination 
of rotation (Dow and Anastasio, 1997), which is not modeled here. 
Increases or decreases in the absolute value of ga will cause VOR habituation or PAN, 
respectively. However, it was more common for VOR habituation and PAN to occur 
simultaneously (fig lB). This behavior could not be reproduced with the lumped model 
(fig 2). It would be necessary on one hand to increase ga to decrease overall VOR gain 
while, on the other hand, decrease ga to produce PAN. A distributed system would ad- 
dress this problem, with multiple parallel pathways, each having velocity-storage and 
adaptive control through the NU. The idea can 
be illustrated using the simplest distributed sys- 
tem which has 2 lumped models in parallel (not 
shown), each having an independently adjustable 
ga. The results from such a two parallel pathway 
model are shown in fig 3. In one pathway, ga(h) 
was increased to model habituation, and ga(o) 
was decreased to start oscillations. Paradoxi- 
cally, although the ultimate effect of increasing 
ga(h) is to decrease VOR gain, the initial effect 
as ga(h) is increased is to increase gain. This is 
due to the resonant frequency of the system con- 
tinuously shifting to higher frequencies and tem- 
porarily matching the frequency of rotation (see 
DISCUSSION). Conversely, when ga(o) is de- 
creased, there is a temporary decrease in gain 
