Forward dynamic models in human 
motor control: Psychophysical evidence 
Daniel M. Wolpert 
wolpert@psyche.mit.edu 
Zoubin Ghahramani 
zoubin@psyche.mit.edu 
Michael I. Jordan 
jordan@psyche.mit.edu 
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
Abstract 
Based on computational principles, with as yet no direct experi- 
mental validation, it has been proposed that the central nervous 
system (CNS) uses an internal model to simulate the dynamic be- 
havior of the motor system in planning, control and learning (Sut- 
ton and Barto, 1981; Ito, 1984; Kawato et al., 1987; Jordan and 
Rumelhart, 1992; Miall et al., 1993). We present experimental re- 
sults and simulations based on a novel approach that investigates 
the temporal propagation of errors in the sensorimotor integration 
process. Our results provide direct support for the existence of an 
internal model. 
I Introduction 
The notion of an internal model, a system which mimics the behavior of a natural 
process, has emerged as an important theoretical concept in motor control (Jordan, 
1995). There are two varieties of internal models-- forward models, which mimic 
the causal flow of a process by predicting its next state given the current state 
and the motor command, and inverse models, which are anticausal, estimating 
the motor command that causes a particular state transition. Forward models-- 
the focus of this article--have been been shown to be of potential use for solving 
four fundamental problems in computational motor control. First, the delays in 
most sensorimotor loops are large, making feedback control infeasible for rapid 
44 Daniel M. Wolpert, Zoubin Ghahramani, Michael I. Jordan 
movements. By using a forward model for internal feedback the outcome of an action 
can be estimated and used before sensory feedback is available (Ito, 1984; Miall 
et al., 1993). Second, a forward model is a key ingredient in a system that uses motor 
outflow (efference copy) to anticipate and cancel the reafferent sensory effects of 
self-movement (Gallistel, 1980; Robinson et al., 1986). Third, a forward model can 
be used to transform errors between the desired and actual sensory outcome of a 
movement into the corresponding errors in the motor command, thereby providing 
appropriate signals for motor learning (Jordan and Rumelhart, 1992). Similarly 
by predicting the sensory outcome of the action, without actually performing it, a 
forward model can be used in mental practice to learn to select between possible 
actions (Sutton and Barto, 1981). Finally, a forward model can be used for state 
estimation in which the model's prediction of the next state is. combined with a 
reafferent sensory correction (Goodwin and Sin, 1984). Although shown to be of 
theoretical importance, the existence and use of an internal forward model in the 
CNS is still a major topic of debate. 
When a subject moves his arm in the dark, he is able to estimate the visual loca- 
tion of his hand with some degree of accuracy. Observer models from engineering 
formalize the sources of information which the CNS could use to construct this 
estimate (Figure 1). This framework consists of a state estimation process (the 
observer) which is able to monitor both the inputs and outputs of the system. In 
particular, for the arm, the inputs are motor commands and the output is sensory 
feedback (e.g. vision and proprioception). There are three basic methods whereby 
the observer can estimate the current state (e.g. position and velocity) of the hand 
form these sources: It can make use of sensory inflow, it can make use of integrated 
motor outflow (dead reckoning), or it can combine these two sources of information 
via the use of a forward model. 
u(t) 
Motor 
Command 
Input 
System 
x(t) 
Outpu y(t) 
Observer 
IState estimate 
Sensory 
Feedback 
Figure l. Observer model of state estimation. 
Forward Dynamic Models in Human Motor Control 45 
2 State Estimation Experiment 
To test between these possibilities, we carried out an experiment in which subjects 
made arm movements in the dark. The full details of the experiment are described 
in the Appendix. Three experimental conditions were studied, involving the use 
of null, assistive and resistive force fields. The subjects' internal estimate of hand 
location was assessed by asking them to localize visually the position of their hand at 
the end of the movement. The bias of this location estimate, plotted as a function 
of movement duration shows a consistent overestimation of the distance moved 
(Figure 2). This bias shows two distinct phases as a function of movement duration, 
an initial increase reaching a peak of 0.9 cm after one second followed by a sharp 
transition to a region of gradual decline. The variance of the estimate also shows an 
initial increase during the first second of movement after which it plateaus at about 
2 cm 2. External forces had distinct effects on the bias and variance propagation. 
Whereas the bias was increased by the assistive force and decreased by the resistive 
force (p < 0.05), the variance was unaffected. 
0.0 
0.0 
b 
 2.5; 
E 
o 2.0' 
( 1.5 
- 1.0 
o3 0.5 
> 
0.0- 
c 
1.5 
E 1.0 
0.5 
 0.0 
o0.5 
-1.0 
-1.5 
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Time (s) 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
d 
Time (s) 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Time (s) 
 2 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Time (s) 
Figure 2. The propagation of the (a) bias and (b) variance of the state 
estimate is shown, with standard error lines, against movement duration. 
The differential effects on (c) bias and (d) variance of the external force, 
assistive (dotted lines) and resistive (solid lines), are also shown relative 
to zero (dashed line). A positive bias represents an overestimation of 
the distance moved. 
46 Daniel M. Wolpert, Zoubin Ghahramani, Michael I. Jordan 
3 Observer Model Simulation 
These experimental results can be fully accounted for only if we assume that the mo- 
tor control system integrates the efferent outflow and the reafferent sensory inflow. 
To establish this conclusion we have developed an explicit model of the sensorimotor 
integration process which contains as special cases all three of the methods referred 
to above. The model a Kalman filter (Kalman and Bucy, 1961)--is a linear dy- 
namical system that produces an estimate of the location of the hand by monitoring 
both the motor outflow and the feedback as sensed, in the absence of vision, solely 
by proprioception. Based on these sources of information the model estimates the 
arm's state, integrating sensory and motor signals to reduce the overall uncertainty 
in its estimate. 
Representing the state of the hand at time t as x(t) (a 2 x 1 vector of position 
and velocity) acted on by a force u = [ttint, ttext] T, combining both internal motor 
commands and external forces, the system dynamic equations can be written in the 
general form of 
,t(t) = .4x(t) + u(t) + w(t), () 
where A and B are matrices with appropriate dimension. The vector w(t) represents 
the process of white noise with an associated covariance matrix given by Q = 
E[w(t)w(t)T]. The system has an observable output y(t) which is linked to the 
actual hidden state x(t) by 
y(t) = Cx(t) + v(t), 
(2) 
where C is a matrix with appropriate dimension and the vector v(t) represents the 
output white noise which has the associated covariance matrix R: E[v(t)v(t)a']. In 
our paradigm, y(t) represents the proprioceptive signals (e.g. from muscle spindles 
and joint receptors). 
In particular, for the hand we approximate the system dynamics by a damped point 
mass moving in one dimension acted on by a force u(t). Equation 1 becomes 
(3) 
where the hand has mass m and damping coefficient . We assume that this system 
is fully observable and choose C to be the identity matrix. The parameters in 
the simulation,  = 3.9 N-s/m, m = 4 kg and ttin t '-- 1.5 N were chosen based 
on the mass of the arm and the observed relationship between time and distance 
traveled. The external force Uext was set to -0.3, 0 and 0.3 N for the resistive, null 
and assistive conditions respectively. To end the movement the sign of the motor 
command ttin t Was reversed until the arm was stationary. Noise covariance matrices 
of Q = 9.5 x 10-5I and R = 3.3 x 10-4I were used representing a standard deviation 
of 1.0 cm for the position output noise and 1.8 cm s - for the position component 
of the state noise. 
At time t = 0 the subject is given full view of his arm and, therefore, starts with an 
estimate (0) = x(0) with zero bias and variance--we assume that vision calibrates 
the system. At this time the light is extinguished and the subject must rely on 
the inputs and outputs to estimate the system's state. The Kalman filter, using a 
Forward Dynamic Models in Hutnan Motor Control 4 7 
model of the system .,/} and , provides an optimal linear estimator of the state 
given by 
= As(t) + u(t) - 
forward model sensory correction 
where K(t) is the recursively updated gain matrix. The model is, therefore, a com- 
bination of two processes which together contribute to the state estimate. The first 
process uses the current state estimate and motor command to predict the next 
state by simulating the movement dynamics with a forward model. The second 
process uses the difference between actual and predicted reafferent sensory feed- 
back to correct the state estimate resulting from the forward model. The relative 
contributions of the internal simulation and sensory correction processes to the final 
estimate are modulated by the Kalman gain matrix K(t) so as to provide optimal 
state estimates. We used this state update equation to model the bias and variance 
propagation and the effects of the external force. 
By making particular choices for the parameters of the Kalman filter, we are able 
to simulate dead reckoning, sensory inflow-based estimation, and forward model- 
based sensor
