577 
HETEROGENEOUS NEURAL NETWORKS FOR 
ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR IN DYNAMIC ENVIRONMENTS 
Hillel J. Chiel 
Biology Dept. 
& CAISR 
CWRU 
Randall D. Beer 
Dept. of Computer Engineering and Science and 
Center for Automation and Intelligent Systems Research 
Case Western Reserve University 
Cleveland, OH 44106 
Leon S. Sterling 
CS Dept. 
& CAISR 
CWRU 
ABSTRACT 
Research in artificial neural networks has generally emphasized 
homogeneous architectures. In conu'ast, the nervous systems of natural 
animals exhibit gmat heterogeneity in both their elements and patterns 
of interconnection. This heterogeneity is crucial to the flexible 
generation of behavior which is essential for survival in a complex, 
dynamic environment. It may also provide powerful insights into the 
design of artificial neural networks. In this paper, we describe a 
heterogeneous neural network for controlling the walking of a 
simulated insect. This controller is inspired by the neuroethological 
and neurobiological literature on insect locomotion. It exhibits a 
variety of statically stable gaits at different speeds simply by varying 
the tonic activity of a single cell. It can also adapt to perturbations as a 
natural consequence of its design. 
INTRODUCTION 
Even very simple animals exhibit a dazzling variety of complex behaviors which they 
continuously adapt to the changing circumstances of their environment. Nervous systems 
evolved in order to generate appropriate behavior in dynamic, uncertain situations and 
thus insure the survival of the organisms containing them. The function of a nervous 
system is closely tied to its structure. Indeed, the heterogeneity of nervous systems has 
been found to be crucial to those few behaviors for which the underlying neural mecha- 
nisms have been worked out in any detail [Selverston, 1988]. There is every reason to 
believe that this conclusion will remain valid as more complex nervous systems are stud- 
ied: 
The brain as an organ is much more diversified than, for example, the 
kidney or the liver. If the performance of relatively few liver cells is 
known in detail, there is a good chance of defining the role of the whole 
organ. In the brain, different cells perform different, specific tasks... 
Only rarely can aggregates of neurons be treated as though they were 
homogeneous. Above all, the cells in the brain are connected with one 
another according to a complicated but specific design that is of far 
greater complexity than the connections between cells in other organs. 
([Kuffier, Nicholls, & Marlin, 1984], p. 4) 
578 Beer, Chiel and Sterling 
In contrast to research on biological nervous systems, work in artificial neural networks 
has primarily emphasized uniform networks of simple processing units with a regular in- 
terconnection scheme. These homogeneous networks typically depend upon some gener- 
al learning procedure to train them to perform specific tasks. This approach has certain 
advantages. Such networks are analytically tractable and one can often prove theorems 
about their behavior. Furthermore, such networks have interesting computational proper- 
ties with immediate practical applications. In addition, the necessity of training these net- 
works has resulted in a resurgence of interest in learning, and new training procedures are 
being developed. When these procedures succeed, they allow the rapid construction of 
networks which perform difficult tasks. 
However, we believe that the role of learning may have been overemphasized in artificial 
neural networks, and that the architectures and heterogeneity of biological nervous sys- 
tems have been unduly neglected. We may leam a great deal from more careful study of 
the design of biological nervous systems and the relationship of this design to behavior. 
Toward this end, we are exploring the ways in which the architecture of the nervous 
systems of simpler o'ganisms can be utilized in the design of artificial neural networks. 
We are particularly interested in developing neural networks capable of continuously 
synthesizing appropriate behavior in dynamic, underspecified, and uncertain 
environments of the sort encountered by natural animals. 
THE ARTIFICIAL INSECT PROJECT 
In order to address these issues, we have begun to construct a simulated insect which we 
call Periplaneta computatrix. Our ultimate goal is to design a nervous system capable of 
endowing this insect with all of the behaviors required for long-term survival in a com- 
plex and dynamic simulated environment similar to that of natural insects. The skills re- 
quired to survive in this environment include the basic abilities to move around, to find 
and consume food when necessary, and to escape from predators. In this paper, we focus 
on the design of that portion of the insect's nervous system which controls its locomo- 
tion. 
In designing this insect and the nervous system which controls it, we are inspired by the 
biological literature. It is important to emphasize, however, that this is not a modeling 
project. We are not attempting to reproduce the experimental data on a particular animal; 
rather, we are using insights gleaned from Biology to design neural networks capable of 
generating similar behaviors. In this manner, we hope to gain a better understanding of 
the role heterogeneity plays in the generation of behavior by nervous systems, and to ab- 
stract design principles for use in artificial neural networks. 
Figure 1. Periplaneta cornputatrix 
Heterogeneous Neural Networks for Adaptive Behavior 579 
BODY 
The body of our artificial insect is shown in Figure 1. It is loosely based on the American 
Cockroach, Periplaneta americana [Bell & Adiyodi, 1981]. However, it is a reasonable 
abstraction of the bodies of most insects. It consists of an abdomen, head, six legs with 
feet, two antennae, and two cerci in the rear. The mouth can open and close and contains 
tactile and chemical sensors. The antennae also contain tactile and chemical sensors. 
The cerci contain tactile and wind sensors. The feet may be'either up or down. When a 
foot is down, it appears as a black square. Finally, a leg can apply forces which translate 
and rotate the body whenever its foot is down. 
In addition, though the insect is only two-dimensional, it is capable of falling down. 
Whenever its center of mass falls outside of the polygon formed by its supporting feet, 
the insect becomes statically unstable. If this condition persists for any length of time, 
then we say that the insect has fallen down and the legs are no longer able to move the 
body. 
NEURAL MODEL 
The essential challenge of the Artificial Insect Project is to design neural controllers ca- 
pable of generating the behaviors necessary to the insect's survival. The neural model 
that we are currently using to construct our controllers is shown in Figure 2. It represents 
the firing frequency of a cell as a function of its input potential. We have used saturating 
linear threshold functions for this relationship (see inset). The RC characteristics of the 
cell membrane are also represented. These cells are interconnected by weighted synapses 
which can cause currents to flow through this membrane. Finally, our model includes the 
possibility of additional intrinsic currents which may be time and voltage dependent. 
These currents 'allow us to capture some of the intrinsic properties which make real neu- 
rons unique and have proven to be important components of the neural mechanisms un- 
derlying many behaviors. 
Intrinsic 
Currents f(v) l v,  
V Firing 
Currents - Frequency 
C 
Cell Firing 
Membrane Properties 
Figure 2. Neural Model 
580 Beer, Chid snd Sterling 
For example, a pacemaker cell is a neuron which is capable of endogenously producing 
rhythmic bursting. Pacemakers have been implicated in a number of temporally pat- 
terned behaviors and play a crucial role in our locomotion controller. As described by 
Kandel (1976, pp. 260-268), a pacemaker cell exhibits the following characteristics: (1) 
when it is sufficiently inhibited, it is silent, (2) when it is sufficiently excited, it bursts 
continuously, (3) between these extremes, the interburst interval is a continuous function 
of the membrane potential, (4) a transient excitation which causes the cell to fire between 
bursts can reset the bursting rhythm, and (5) a transient inhibition which prematurely ter- 
minates a burst can also reset the bursting rhythm. 
These characteristics can be reproduced with our neural model through the addition of 
two intrinsic currents. l, is a ticpolarizing current which tends to pull the membrane po- 
tential above threshold. I L is a hyperpolarizing current which tends to pull the membrane 
potential below threshold. These currents change according to the following rules: (1) 
I, is triggered whenever the cell goes above threshold or I L terminates, and it then re- 
mains active for a fixed period of time, and (2) IL is triggered whenever I, terminates, 
and it then remains active for a variable period of time whose duration is a function of the 
membrane potential. In our work to date, the voltage dependence of I[ has been linear. 
LOCOMOTION 
An animal's ability to move around its environment is fundamental to many of its other 
behaviors. In most insects, this requirement is fulfilled by six-legged walking. Thus, this 
was the first capability we sought to provide to P. computatrix. Walking involves the 
generation of temporally patterned forces and stepping movements such that the insect 
maintains a steady forward motion at a variety of speeds without falling down. Though 
we do not address all of these issues here, it is worth pointing out that locomotion is an 
interesting adaptive behavior in its own right. An insect robustly solves this complex co- 
ordination problem in real time in the presence of variations in load and terrain, develop- 
mental changes, and damage to the walking ap
