Analogy--Watershed or Waterloo? 
Structural alignment and the development of 
connectionist models of analogy 
Dedre Gentner Arthur B. Markman 
Department of Psychology Department of Psychology 
Northwestern University Northwestern University 
2029 Sheridan Rd. 2029 Sheridan Rd. 
Evanston, IL 60208 Evanston, IL 60208 
ABSTRACT 
Neural network models have been criticized for their inability to make 
use of compositional representations. In this paper, we describe a series 
of psychological phenomena that demonstrate the role of structured 
representations in cognition. These findings suggest that people 
compare relational representations via a process of structural alignment. 
This process will have to be captured by any model of cognition, 
symbolic or subsymbolic. 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
Pattern recognition is central to cognition. At the perceptual level, we notice key features 
of the world (like symmetry), recognize objects in front of us and identify the letters on a 
printed page. At a higher level, we recognize problems we have solved before and 
determine similarities--including analogical similarities--between new situations and old 
ones. Neural network models have been successful at capturing sensory pattern 
recognition (e.g., Sabourin & Mitiche, 1992). In contrast, the determination of higher 
level similarities has been well modeled by symbolic processes (Falkenhainer, Forbus, & 
Gentner, 1989). An important question is whether neural networks can be extended to 
high-level similarity and pattern recognition. 
In this paper, we will summarize the constraints on cognitive representations suggested 
by the psychological study of similarity and analogy. We focus on three themes: (1) 
structural alignment; (2) structural projection; and (3) flexibility. 
855 
856 Gentner and Markman 
2.0 STRUCTURAL ALIGNMENT IN SIMILARITY 
Extensive psychological research has examined the way people compare pairs of items to 
determine their similarity. Mounting evidence suggests that the similarity of two 
complex items depends on the degree of match between their component objects (common 
and distinctive attributes) and on the degree of match between the relations among the 
component objects. Specifically, there is evidence that (1) similarity involves structured 
pattern matching, (2) similarity involves structured pattern completion, (3) comparing the 
same item with different things can highlight different aspects of the item and (4) even 
comparisons of a single pair of items may yield multiple interpretations. We will 
examine these four claims in the following sections. 
2.1 SIMILARITY INVOLVES STRUCTURED PATTERN MATCHING 
The central idea underlying structured pattern matching is that similarity involves an 
alignment of relational structure. For example, in Figure la, configuration A is clearly 
more similar to the top configuration than configuration B, because A has similar objects 
taking part in the same relation (above), while B has similar objects taking part in a 
different relation (next-to). This determination can be made regardless of whether the 
objects taking part in the relations are similar. For example, in Figure lb configuration 
A is also more similar to the top configuration than is configuration B, because A shares 
a relation with the top configuration, while B does not. As a check on this intuition, 10 
subjects were asked to tell us which configuration (A or B) went best with ti'/e top 
configuration for the triads in Figures la and lb. All 10 subjects chose configuration A 
for both triads. This example demonstrates that relations (such as the common above 
relation) are important in similarity processing. 
A 
A B A 
(^) 
Figure 1. 
Examples of structural alignment in perception. 
B 
The inportance of relations was also demonstrated by Palmer (1978) who asked subjects 
to rate the similarity of pairs of configurations like those in Figure 2. The pair in Figure 
2a shares the global property that both are open figures, while the pair in Figure 2b does 
not. As would be expected if subjects attend to relations when determining similarity, 
Structural alignment &: the development of connectionist models of analogy 857 
higher similarity ratings were given to pairs like the one in Figure 2a than to pairs like 
the one in Figure 2b. This finding can only be explained by appealing to structural 
similarity, because both pairs of configurations share the same number of local line 
segments. Consistent with this result, Palmer also found that subjects were faster to say 
that the items in Figure 2b are different than that the items in Figure 2a are different. A 
similar result was obtained by Lockhead and King (1977). 
Figure 2. 
Structured pattern matching in a study by Palmer (1978). 
Further research suggests that common bindings between relations and the items they 
relate are also central to similarity. For example, Clement and Gentner (1991) presented 
subjects with pairs of analogous stories. One story described organisms called Tams that 
ate rocks, while the other described robots that collected data on a planet. In each story, 
one matching fact also had a matching causal antecedent. For example, the Tams' 
exhausting the minerals on the rock CAUSED them to move to another rock, while 
the robots' exhausting the data on a planet CAUSED them to move to another 
planet. A second matching fact did not have a matching causal antecedent. For 
example, the Tams' underbelly could not function on a new rock and the 
robots' probe could not function on a new planet, but the causes of these facts 
did not match. Subjects were asked which of the two pairs of key facts (shown in bold) 
was more important to the stories. Subjects selected the pair that had the matching causal 
antecedent, suggesting that their mappings preserved the relational connections in the 
stories. 
2.2 STRUCTURED PATTERN COMPLETION 
Pattern completion has long been a central feature of neural network models (Anderson, 
Silverstein, Ritz, & Jones, 1977; Hopfield, 1982). For example, in the BSB model of 
Anderson et al., vectors in which some units are below their maximum value are filled in 
by completing a pattern based on the vector similarities of the current activation pattern 
to previously learned patterns. 
The key issue here is the kind of information that guides pattern completion in humans. 
Data from psychological studies suggests that subjects' pattern matching ability is 
controlled by structural similarities rather than by geometric similarities. For example, 
Medin and Goldstone presented subjects with pairs of objects like those in Figure 3 
(Medin, Goldstone & Gentner, in press). The left-hand figure in both pairs is somewhat 
ambiguous, but the right-hand figure is not. Subjects who were asked to list the 
commonalities of the pair in Figure 3a said that both figures had three prongs, while 
subjects who were asked to list the commonalities of the pair in Figure 3b said that both 
figures had four prongs. This finding was obtained for 15 of 16 triads tested, and suggests 
858 Gentner and Markman 
that subjects were mapping the structure from the unambiguous figure onto the 
ambiguous one. Of course, in order for the mapping to take place, the underlying 
structure of the figures has to be readily alignable, and there must be ambiguity in the 
target figure. In the pair in Figure 3c, the left hand item cannot be viewed as having four 
prongs, and so this mapping is not made. 
Figure 3: 
(c) 
Example of structured pattern completion. 
Structured pattern completion also occurs in conceptual structures. Clement and Gentner 
(1991) extended the study described above by deleting the key matching facts from one of 
the stories (e.g., the bold facts from the robot story). Subjects read both stories, then 
predicted one new fact about the robot story. Subjects were free to predict anything at all, 
but 50% of the subjects predicted the fact with the matching causal antecedent, while only 
28% of the subjects predicted the fact with no matching causal antecedent. By 
comparison, a control group that made predictions about the target story without seeing 
the base predicted both facts at the same rate (about 5%). This finding underlines the 
importance of connectivity in pauern completion. People's predictions were determined 
not just by the local information, but by whether it was connected to matching 
information. Thus, pattern completion is structure-sensitive. 
2.3 DIFFERENT COMPARISONS-DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS 
Comparison is flexible. When an item takes part in many comparisons, it may be 
interpreted differently in each comparison. For example, in Figure 3a, the left figure is 
interpreted as having 3 prongs, while in Figure 3b, it is interpreted as having 4 prongs. 
Similarly, the comparison 'My surgeon is a butcher' conveys a clumsy surgeon, but 
'Genghis Khan was a butcher' conveys a ruthless killer (Glucksberg and Keysar, 1992). 
This type of flexibility is also evident in an example presented by Spellman and Holyoak 
(1992). They pointed out that some politicians likened the Gulf War to World War II, 
implying that the United States was acting as the world's policeman to stop a tyrant. 
Other politicians compared Operation Desert Storm to Vietnam, implying that the United 
States entered into a potentially endless conflict between two other nations. Clearly, 
different comparisons highlighted different features of the Gulf War. 
Structural alignment &: the development of connectionist models of analogy 859 
2.4 SAME COMPARISON-DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS 
Even a single comparison can yield more than one distinct interpretation. This situation 
may arise when the items are richly represented, with many different clusters of 
knowledge. It can also arise when the comparison permits more than one alignment, as 
when the similarities of the objects in an item suggest different correspondences than do 
the 
