Translating Locative Prepositions 
Paul W. Munro and Mary Tabasko 
Department of Information Science 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
ABSTRACT 
A network was trained by back propagation to map locative expressions 
of the form noun-preposition-noun to a semantic representation, as in 
Cosic and Munro (1988). The network's performance was analyzed 
over several simulations with training sets in both English and 
German. Translation of prepositions was attempted by presenting a 
locative expression to a network trained in one language to generate a 
semantic representation; the semantic representation was then presented 
to the network trained in the other language to generate the appropriate 
preposition. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Connectionist approaches have enjoyed success, relative to competing frameworks, in 
accounting for context sensitivity and have become an attractive approach to NLP. An ar- 
chitecture (Figure 1) was put forward by Cosic and Munro (1988) to map locative expres- 
sions of the form noun-preposition-noun to a representation of the spatial relationship 
between the referents of the two nouns. The features used in the spatial representations 
were abstracted from Herskovits (1986). The network was trained using the generalized 
delta rule (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986) on a set of patterns with four compo- 
nents, three syntactic and one semantic. The syntactic components are a pair of nouns 
separated by a locative preposition [N1-LP-N2], and the semantic component is a repre- 
sentation of the spatial relationship [SR]. 
598 
Translating Locative Prepositions 599 
The architecture of the network includes two encoder banks, E1 and E2, inspired by 
Hinton (1986), to force the development of distributed representations of the nouns. This 
was not done to enhance the performance of the network but rather to facilitate analysis of 
the network's function, since an important component of Herskovits' theory is the role of 
nouns as modifiers of the preposition's ideal meaning. 
The networks were trained to perform a pattern-completion task. That is, three compo- 
nents from a pattern are selected from the training set and presented to the input layer; ei- 
ther the LP or the SR component is missing. The task is to provide both the LP and SR 
components at the output. Analysis of a network after the learning phase consists of sev- 
eral tests, such as presenting prepositions with no accompanying nouns, in order to ob- 
tain an ideal meaning for each preposition, and comparing the noun representations at 
the encoder banks E1 and E2. 
Noun Unlta clouds lake campsite table book 
(25) sky river school glass flowers 
plane road house bowl grass 
boat city floor crack man 
water island room chip fish 
Spatial Relation N1 overN2 N1 within borderof N2 
Unita N2 over N1 N1 touching N2 
(10) N1 at edge of N2 N1 near N2 
N1 embedded in N2 N1 far from N2 
N2 contains N1 N2 suppos N1 
Prepoaltlon 
Unlta 
() 
Figure 1: Network Architecture. Inputs are presented at the lowest layer, either across 
input banks N1, LP, and N2 or across input banks N1, SR, and N2. The bold lines indi- 
cate connectivity from all the units in the lower bank to all the units in the upper bank. 
The units used to represent the patterns are listed in the table on the right. 
2 METHODOLOGY 
2.1 THE TRAINING SETS 
3125 (25 x 5 x 25) pattern combinations can be formed with the 25 nouns and five prepo- 
sitions; of these, 137 meaningful expressions were chosen to constitute an English 
training corpus. For each phrase, a set of one to three SR units was chosen to represent 
the position of the second noun's referent relative to the first noun's. To generate the 
German corpus, we picked the best German preposition to describe the spatial representa- 
tion between the nouns. So, each training set consists of the same set of 137 spatial re- 
lationships between pairs of nouns. The correspondences between prepositions in the two 
languages across training sets is given in Table 1. 
600 Munro and Tabasko 
Table 1: The number of correspondences between the prepositions used in the 
English and German training sets. 
GE' IN AT ON UNDER ABOVE 
IN 53 4 0 0 0 
AN 0 9 1.2 0 0 
AUF 0 8 20 0 0 
UNTER 0 0 0 18 0 
OBER o o o o 13 
2.2 TRANSLATION OF THE PREPOSITIONS 
Transforming syntactic expressions to semantic representations and inverting the process 
in another language is known as the interlingua approach to machine translation. The net- 
work described in this paper is particularly well-suited to this approach since it can per- 
form this transformation in either direction (encoding or decoding). Networks trained 
using expressions from two languages can be attached in sequence to accomplish the 
translation task. A syntactic triple (N1-LP-N2) from the source language is presented to 
the network trained in that language. The resulting SR output is then presented with the 
corresponding nouns in the target language as input to the network trained in the target 
language, yielding the appropriate preposition in the target language as output. In this 
procedure, it is assumed that, relative to the prepositions, the nouns are easy to translate; 
that is, the translation of the nouns is assumed to be much less dependent on context. An 
example translation of the preposition on in the expression house on lake is illustrated 
in Figure 2. 
3 RESULTS 
Eight networks were trained using the two-stroke procedure described above; four using 
English language inputs and four using German, with two different learning rates in each 
language, and two different initializations for the random number generator in each case. 
Various tests were performed on the trained network in order to determine the ideal mean- 
ing of each preposition, the network's classification of the various nouns, and the contex- 
tual interaction of the nouns with the prepositions. Also, translation of prepositions 
from English to German was attempted. The various test modes are described in detail 
below. 
Translating Locative Prepositions 601 
_I ..... I .... I__ 
LP_out SR_out 
s [prep] SR$ 
?.i 
E2_ac% 
I__ I 
See 
Figure 2: A Schematic View of the Translation Procedure. After training networks in two 
languages, a preposition can be appropriately translated from one language to the other by 
performing a decodg task in the source language followed by an encoding task in the 
target language. The figure shows the resulting activity patterns from the expression 
house on lake. The system correctly translates on in English to an in German. In 
other contexts, on could correspond to the German  
3.1 CONVERGENCE 
In each case, the networks converged to states of very low average error (less than 0.5%). 
However, in no case did a network learn to respond correctly to every phrase in the train- 
ing set. The performance of each training mn was measured by computing the total sum 
of squared error over the output units across all 137 training patterns. The errors were an- 
alyzed into four types: 
LP-LP errors: 
SR-LP errors (encoding): 
LP-SR errors (decoding): 
SR-SR errors: 
Errors in the LP output units for (N1-LP-N2) input 
Errors in the LP output units for (N1-SR-N2) input 
Errors in the SR output units for (N1-LP-N2) input 
Errors in the SR output units for (N1-SR-N2) input 
602 Munro and Tabasko 
In assessing the performance of the network after learning, the error measure driving the 
training (that is, the difference between desired and actual activity levels for every output 
unit) is inappropriate. In cases such as this, where the output units are being trained to 
binary values, it is much more informative to compare the relative activity of the output 
units to the desired pattern and simply count the number of inputs that are wrong. This 
approach was used to determine whether each phrase had been processed correctly or incor- 
rectly by the network. Preposition output errors were counted by identifying the most 
highly activated output unit and checking whether it matched the correct preposition. 
Since the number of active units in the SR component of each training pattern varies 
from one to three, a response was registered as incorrect if any of the units that should 
have been off were more active than any of those that should have been on. These results 
are reported in Table 2 as total errors out of the 137 in the training corpus. 
Table 2: Number of errors for each task in each simulation (out of 137). 
LP-LP SR-LP LP-SR SR - SR 
ENG 1 0 0 3 0 
ENG 2 0 0 2 0 
ENG 3 0 0 2 0 
ENG 4 0 0 2 0 
ENG AVG 0.00 0.00 2.25 0.00 
GER 1 0 1 2 0 
GER 2 0 1 3 0 
GER 3 0 0 2 0 
GER 4 0 0 4 0 
GER AVG 0.00 0.50 2.75 0.00 
3.2 IDEAL MEANINGS OF THE PREPOSITIONS 
To find the unmodified spatial representation the net associates with each preposition, the 
prepositions were presented individually to the net and the resulting spatial responses 
recorded. This gives a context-free interpretation of each preposition. Figure 3 shows the 
output activity on the spatial units for one simulation in each language. The results were 
similar for all simulations within a language, demonstrating that the network finds fairly 
stable representations for the prepositions. Note that the representations of German auf, 
an, and in share much of their activation with those of English on, at, and in, although 
its distribution across the prepositions varies. For example, the preposition auf is acti- 
vated much like English on, but without the units indicating the first object at the edge 
of and near the second. These units are found weakly activated in German an, along with 
the unit indicating coincidence. The ideal meaning of auf, then, may be somewhere be- 
tween those of on and at in English. 
Translating Locative Prepositions 603 
1 
ABOVE 
1 
UNDER 
I __ I 
AT 
IN 
-- _ I _ 
I I 
1 
I i m 
0BER 
UNTER 
= I I 
AUF 
I 
IN 
Figure 3: Ideal Meanings of the Prepo
