Object-Based Analog VLSI Vision 
Circuits 
Christof Koch 
Computation and Neural Systems 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 
Bimal Mathur, Shih-Chii Liu 
Rockwell International Science Center 
Thousand Oaks, CA 
John G. Harris 
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
Cambridge, MA 
Jin Luo, Massimo Sivilotti 
Tanner Research, Inc. 
Pasadena, CA 
Abstract 
We describe two successfully working, analog VLSI vision circuits 
that move beyond pixel-based early vision algorithms. One circuit, 
implementing the dynamic wires model, provides for dedicated lines 
of communication among groups of pixels that share a common 
property. The chip uses the dynamic wires model to compute the 
arclength of visual contours. Another circuit labels all points inside 
a given contour with one voltage and all other with another volt- 
age. Its behavior is very robust, since small breaks in contours are 
automatically sealed, providing for Figure- Ground segregation in 
a noisy environment. Both chips are implemented using networks 
of resistors and switches and represent a step towards object level 
processing since a single voltage value encodes the property of an 
ensemble of pixels. 
1 CONTOUR-LENGTH CHIP 
Contour length computation is useful for further processing such as structural 
saliency (Shaashua and Ullman, 1988), which is thought to be an important stage 
before object recognition. This computation is impossible on an analog chip if we 
828 
Object-Based Analog VLSI Vision Circuits 829 
o 
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I  I I 
10 20 
(Donfour Leng'l' h 
Figure 1' Figure 1: Plot of measured voltage vs. contour length from 30 different 
contours scanned into the contour length chip. The voltage is a linear function of 
contour length. 
are restricted to pure pixel- or image-based operations. The dynamic wire method- 
ology provides dedicated lines of communication among groups of pixels of an image 
which share common properties (Liu and Harris, 1992). In simple applications, ob- 
ject regions can be grouped together to compute the area or the center of mass of 
each object. Alternatively, object boundaries may be used to compute curvature 
or contour length. These ideas are not limited to sets of simple electrical wires; 
resistive networks can also be configured on the fly. The problem of smoothing 
object contours using resistive dynamic wires has been previously studied (Liu and 
Harris, 1992). 
In the contour-length application, pixels along image contours are electrically con- 
nected by a reconfigurable dynamic wire. The first step of processing requires that 
each contour choose an arbitrary but unique leader pixel. The top of Fig. 2 shows 
several examples of contours and indicates which pixels where chosen as leaders by 
the chip. The leader is responsible for connecting a shunting resistor between the 
shared dynamic wire and ground. If each pixel on the contour supplies a constant 
amount of current to the dynamic wire, all of the current must flow through the 
shunting resistor. Therefore, the voltage on the wire will encode the contour length. 
Fig. I shows the linear relationship between the measured voltage and the contour 
length. The bottom half of Fig. 2 shows the length of several example contours using 
an intensity coding. The brighter contours indicate a higher voltage and therefore a 
longer contour. The contour length chip was fabricated through MOSIS using 2/zm 
CMOS technology. The prototype 2x2 mm 2 chip contains an a 7x7 pixel array. 
830 Koch, Mathur, Liu, Harris, Luo, and Sivilotti 
Figure 2: Four binary contour images were scanned into the contour-length chip and 
are shown in the top figure. The highlighted pixel in each contour was chosen by the 
chip to be the leader. The bottom figure shows the measured voltages (indicated 
by intensity) from the contour-length chip for the four images are shown. Since the 
intensity of each pixel encodes its length, the longer contours are brighter. 
Object-Based Analog VLSI Vision Circuits 831 
The most challenging aspect of the design of the contour-length chip is the circuitry 
to uniquely select a pixel from each contour to be the leader. The leader is selected 
by entering all the pixels along each contour in a competition. The winner of this 
competition will be the leader. This competition requires each node to charge up its 
own capacitor once a reset line has been triggered. The first node that charges its 
capacitor above the trip point of a digital inverter will pull down a global precharge 
wire which connects all the pixels along the contour. This wire will in turn latch the 
states of the winner and losers. One of the pixels will normally toggle first because 
of the inherent offsets and component mismatches in silicon. 
2 FIGURE-GROUND CHIP 
Ullman (1984) proposed that a visual routine is used in human vision to determine 
if a specified point in the visual field is inside or outside of one (or more) closed 
visual contours. We describe such a chip that labels all points inside a given-- 
possibly incomplete and broken--contour. We assume that the presence of an edge 
in the image causes switches at the corresponding grid point within a rectangular 
resistive network to open (Fig. 3). A closed edge contour will then correspond to a 
series of open switches on this grid. We assume that the visual contour will always 
encompass the central grid point in the array. At this point, the resistive grid is 
connected to the battery V.i9, while the periphery of the array is grounded to Vsna. 
If the voltage at all other grid points is left floating and the contour is complete, 
that is, the central grid point is completely isolated from the periphery of the chip 
by a series of open grid points, the voltage at all points inside the contour rises to 
Viis, while the voltage at grid points outside the contour will settle to Vgnd. Thus, 
the figure will be labeled by one voltage level and ground by another. 
Contours in real images are frequently incomplete, but instead have broken segments 
of one or more pixels. This will enable the current to flow through these holes in 
the contour, smearing out the voltage level between inside and outside. We exploit 
a property of Mead's (1989) Hres circuit, used to implement the resistances, to 
achieve contour completion. While the current flowing through Hres is linear in the 
voltage gradient for small voltage differences, it saturates for large voltage gradients. 
At those locations where the contour is broken, the saturating resistances limit the 
current flow, preventing smoothing of the voltage profile to occur. 
Figure 4 shows the responses of the Figure-Ground chip to different input patterns 
collected with a fixed bias: V.ig -- 3.5 V and Vgnd -- 2 V. The two-dimensional data 
is presented as pairs of images. The input patterns are located on the left while the 
corresponding voltage outputs are presented next to the input on the right. The 
black-white patterns are used to represent the binary input data encoding object 
boundaries. Thus, at all locations marked in black, the associated switches shown in 
Fig. la are opened. The gray-scale on the right denotes output voltage levels, where 
the darkest value corresponds to Vii s and the brightest to VSnd. The center pixel 
of the view field is always set to Vii s. Notice that at every node where a boundary 
input signal (in black) appears and the switches are opened, the output voltage at 
that node is tied to Vsnd. This can be seen best in (e; white outline). To evaluate 
the ability of our circuit to perform Figure-Ground segregation in the presence of 
breaks in the contour, more and wider breaks are introduced into a simple square 
832 Koch, Mathur, Liu, Harris, Luo, and Sivilotti 
Voltage 
x 
Y 
Vgnd 5 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3: (a) The Figure-Ground network is made up of resistors and switches. The 
input to the chip is a binary edge map. At every grid point in the rectangular array 
where edges have been found, four switches are opened, isolating that node from its 
four neighbors (the shaded edge contour corresponds to a series of isolated nodes). 
We assume that the central point in the array is always enclosed by the contour. 
This point is connected to a voltage source Vfig, while the periphery is connected to 
the voltage Vgna. If the contour is unbroken, the voltage at each interior point will 
then rise to V. tig, while all outside grid points will settle to Vgra. Thus, the object 
is rapidly segregated from the background. If the contour is not complete, the 
saturating resistors (indicated with simple resistors) will limit the current flowing 
through these holes in the contour and partially seal off the boundary. (b) represents 
a conceptual view of how an object (figure) is segregated from the background in 
the two-dimensional view field, in terms of two distinct voltage levels (V. tig labels 
the object and Vgna labels the background). The circuit has 48 by 48 nodes on a 4.6 
by 6.8 rnrn 2 die size and was implemented using MOSIS 2 ttrn CMOS technology. 
Object-Based Analog VLSI Vision Circuits 833 
(a) The input consists of a 
completely enclosed box. The 
network is therefore broken into 
two isolated segments, the inside 
and the outside of the box and 
labeled by two very different 
voltage values, Vfig and Vgnd. 
I I 
(b) The object boundary has a 
break equal to one pixel at the 
center of the left and right edges. 
Due to the large voltage 
difference across these two leaks, 
the saturated horizontal 
resistances, HRes, saturate, 
thereby helping to seal off these 
breaks using a very simple 
algorithm. 
(C) The width of the breaks in the 
contour increases to three pixels 
each. Yet HRes still acts to 
effectively seal the two holes and 
the Figure is segregated from 
the Surround. 
I I 
(d) The width of the breaks 
increases to five pixels each. Due 
to the much smaller voltage 
g
