Spike-based learning rules and stabilization of 
persistent neural activity 
Xiaohui Xie and H. Sebastian Seung 
Dept. of Brain & Cog. Sci., MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 
xhxie, seung @mit.edu 
Abstract 
We analyze the conditions under which synaptic learning rules based 
on action potential timing can be approximated by learning rules based 
on firing rates. In particular, we consider a form of plasticity in which 
synapses depress when a presynaptic spike is followed by a postsynaptic 
spike, and potentiate with the opposite temporal ordering. Such differen- 
tial anti-Hebbianplasticity can be approximated under certain conditions 
by a learning rule that depends on the time derivative of the postsynaptic 
firing rate. Such a learning rule acts to stabilize persistent neural activity 
patterns in recurrent neural networks. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Recent experiments have 
demonstrated types of synaptic 
plasticity that depend on the 
temporal ordering of presynap- 
tic and postsynaptic spiking. At 
cortical[ 1] and hippocampal[2] 
synapses, long-term potenti- 
ation is induced by repeated 
pairing of a presynaptic spike 
and a succeeding postsynaptic 
spike, while long-term depres- 
sion results when the order 
is reversed. The dependence 
of the change in synaptic 
strength on the difference 
/X't = tpost -- tpre between 
postsynaptic and presynaptic 
spike times has been measured 
quantitatively. This pairing 
function, sketched in Figure 
1A, has positive and negative 
width of tens of milliseconds. 
pairing function as differential 
A 
B 
0 
o 
tpost - tpr e 
(re II Illl IllIll II II Illlllll![I I llll 
post IIIIlllllll Illllllllllll 
o.51 
o 1 ooo 2000 
time (ms) 
Figure 1: (A) Pairing function for differential Heb- 
bian learning. The change in synaptic strength is plot- 
ted versus the time difference between postsynaptic 
and presynaptic spikes. (B) Pairing function for dif- 
ferential anti-Hebbian learning. (C) Differential anti- 
Hebbian learning is driven by changes in firing rates. 
The synaptic learning rule of Eq. (1) is applied to two 
Poisson spike trains. The synaptic strength remains 
roughly constant in time, except when the postsynap- 
tic rate changes. 
lobes correspond to potentiation and depression, and a 
We will refer to synaptic plasticity associated with this 
Hebbian plasticity--Hebbian because the conditions for 
200 X. Xie and H. S. Seung 
potentiation are as predicted by Hebb[3], and differential because it is driven by the 
difference between the opposing processes of potentiation and depression. 
The pairing function of Figure 1A is not characteristic of all synapses. For example, an 
opposite temporal dependence has been observed at electrosensory lobe synapses of elec- 
tric fish[4]. As shown in Figure lB, these synapses depress when a presynaptic spike is 
followed by a postsynaptic one, and potentiate when the order is reversed. We will refer to 
this as differential anti-Hebbian plasticity. 
According to these experiments, the maximum ranges of the differential Hebbian and anti- 
Hebbian pairing functions are roughly 20 and 40 ms, respectively. This is fairly short, and 
seems more compatible with descriptions of neural activity based on spike timing rather 
than instantaneous firing rates[5, 6]. In fact, we will show that there are some conditions 
under which spike-based learning rules can be approximated by rate-based learning rules. 
Other people have also studied the relationship between spike-based and rate-based learn- 
ing rules[7, 8]. 
The pairing functions of Figures 1A and lB lead to rate-based learning rules like those 
traditionally used in neural networks, except that they depend on temporal derivatives of 
firing rates as well as firing rates themselves. We will argue that the differential anti- 
Hebbian learning rule of Figure lB could be a general mechanism for tuning the strength 
of positive feedback in networks that maintain a short-term memory of an analog variable 
in persistent neural activity. A number of recurrent network models have been proposed 
to explain memory-related neural activity in motor [9] and prefrontal[10] cortical areas, 
as well as the head direction system [11] and oculomotor integrator[12, 13, 14]. All of 
these models require precise tuning of synaptic strengths in order to maintain continuously 
variable levels of persistent activity. As a simple illustration of tuning by differential anti- 
Hebbian learning, a model of persistent activity maintained by an integrate-and-fire neuron 
with an excitatory autapse is studied. 
2 SPIKE-BASED LEARNING RULE 
Pairing functions like those of Figure 1 have been measured using repeated pairing of a 
single presynaptic spike with a single postsynaptic spike. Quantitative measurements of 
synaptic changes due to more complex patterns of spiking activity have not yet been done. 
We will assume a simple model in which the synaptic change due to arbitrary spike trains is 
the sum of contributions from all possible pairings of presynaptic with postsynaptic spikes. 
The model is unlikely to be an exact description of real synapses, but could turn out to be 
approximately valid. 
We will write the spike train of the ith neuron as a series of Dirac delta functions, si (t) = 
y', 6(t - T), where T is the nth spike time of the ith neuron. The synaptic weight from 
neuron j to i at time t is denoted by Wij (t). Then the change in synaptic weight induced 
by presynaptic spikes occurring in the time interval [0, T] is modeled as 
Wij(T + A) - Wij(A) = dtj dti f(ti - tj)si(ti)sj(tj) 
(1) 
Each presynaptic spike is paired with all postsynaptic spikes produced before and after. 
For each pairing, the synaptic weight is changed by an amount depending on the pairing 
function f. The pairing function is assumed to be nonzero inside the interval [-r, r], and 
zero outside. We will refer to r as the pairing range. 
According to our model, each presynaptic spike results in induction of plasticity only after 
a latency A. Accordingly, the arguments T + A and  of Wij on the left hand side of the 
equation are shifted relative to the limits T and 0 of the integral on the right hand side. We 
Spike-based Learning and Stabilization of Persistent Neural Activity 201 
will assume that the latency A is greater than the pairing range r, so that Wi3 at any time is 
only influenced by presynaptic and postsynaptic spikes that happened before that time, and 
therefore the learning rule is causal. 
3 RELATION TO RATE-BASED LEARNING RULES 
The learning rule of Eq. (1) is driven by correlations between presynaptic and postsynaptic 
activities. This dependence can be made explicit by making the change of variables u -- 
ti - tj in Eq. (1), which yields 
Wij(T + )- WO(A) 
where we have defined the cross-correlation 
duf(u)Ci(u) (2) 
T 
Ci(u) = fo dt si(t + u) s(t) . 
(3) 
and made use of the fact that f vanishes outside the interval I-r, r]. Our immediate goal 
is to relate Eq. (2) to learning rules that are based on the cross-correlation between firing 
rates, 
j0 T 
C[jate(u) - dtvi(t + u) vj(t) (4) 
There are a number of ways of defining instantaneous firing rates. Sometimes they are 
computed by averaging over repeated presentations of a stimulus. In other situations, they 
are defined by temporal filtering of spike trains. The following discussion is general, and 
should apply to these and other definitions of firing rates. 
The rate correlation is commonly subtracted from the total correlation to obtain the spike 
correlation Cid. pik = Cij - C ate. To derive a rate-based approximation to the learning 
rule (2), we rewrite it as 
: /: spike 
Wij(T + ) - Wij(A) = du f(u)C[?(u) + du f(u)Cij (u) 
T T 
(5) 
and simply neglect the second term. Shortly we will discuss the conditions under which 
this is a good approximation. But first we derive another form for the first term by applying 
the approximation t/i(t + u)  t/i(t) + ubi(t) to obtain 
 fo r 
/_ duf(u)C[jate(u)  dt[/3oi(t) + lPi(t)]j(t) 
T 
(6) 
where we define 
= au(u) 
T 
/3 = duuf(u) 
T 
(7) 
This approximation is good when firing rates vary slowly compared to the pairing range 
r. The learning rule depends on the postsynaptic rate through/30'i +/31hi. When the 
first term dominates the second, then the learning rule is the conventional one based on 
correlations between firing rates, and the sign of/30 determines whether the rule is Hebbian 
or anti-Hebbian. 
In the remainder of the paper, we will discuss the more novel case where/30 = 0. This 
holds for the pairing functions shown in Figures 1A and lB, which have positive and neg- 
ative lobes with areas that exactly cancel in the definition of/30. Then the dependence on 
202 X. Xie and H. S. Seung 
postsynaptic activity is purely on the time derivative of the firing rate. Differential Hebbian 
learning corresponds to/52 > 0 (Figure 1A), while differential anti-Hebbian learning leads 
to/52 < 0 (Figure lB). To summarize the/50 = 0 case, the synaptic changes due to rate 
correlations are approximated by 
(diff. Hebbian) 
Wij cr -biv (diff. anti-Hebbian) (8) 
for slowly varying rates. These formulas imply that a constant postsynaptic firing rate 
causes no net change in synaptic strength. Instead, changes in rate are required to induce 
synaptic plasticity. 
To illustrate this point, Figure 1C shows the result of applying differential anti-Hebbian 
learning to two spike trains. The presynaptic spike train was generated by a 50 Hz Poisson 
process, while the postsynaptic spike train was generated by an inhomogeneous Poisson 
process with rate that shifted from 50 Hz to 200 Hz at 1 sec. Before and after the shift, 
the synaptic strength fluctuates but remains roughly constant. But the upward shift in firing 
rate causes a downward shift in synaptic strength, in accord with the sign of the differential 
anti-Hebbian rule in Eq. (8). 
The rate-based approximation works well for this example, because t
