An MEG Study of Response Latency and 
Variability in the Human Visual System 
During a VisualsMotor Integration Task 
Akaysha C. Tang 
Dept. of Psychology 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
akaysha@unm. edu 
Barak A. Pearlmutter 
Dept. of Computer Science 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
bap@cs.unm. edu 
Tim A. Hely 
Santa Fe Institute 
1399 Hyde Park Road 
Santa Fe, NM 87501 
timhely@santafe. edu 
Michael Zibulevsky 
Dept. of Computer Science 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
michael@cs. unto. edu 
Michael P. Weisend 
VA Medical Center 
1501 San Pedro SE 
Albuquerque, NM 87108 
mweisend@unm. edu 
Abstract 
Human reaction times during sensory-motor tasks vary consider- 
ably. To begin to understand how this variability arises, we exam- 
ined neuronal populational response time variability at early versus 
late visual processing stages. The conventional view is that pre- 
cise temporal information is gradually lost as information is passed 
through a layered network of mean-rate units. We tested in hu- 
mans whether neuronal populations at different processing stages 
behave like mean-rate units. A blind source separation algorithm 
was applied to MEG signals from sensory-motor integration tasks. 
Response time latency and variability for multiple visual sources 
were estimated by detecting single-trial stimulus-locked events for 
each source. In two subjects tested on four visual reaction time 
tasks, we reliably identified sources belonging to early and late vi- 
sual processing stages. The standard deviation of response latency 
was smaller for early rather than late processing stages. This sup- 
ports the hypothesis that human populational response time vari- 
ability increases from early to late visual processing stages. 
I Introduction 
In many situations, precise timing of a motor output is essential for successful task 
completion. Somehow the reliability in the output timing is related to the reliability 
of the underlying neural systems associated with different stages of processing. Re- 
cent literature from animal studies suggests that individual neurons from different 
brain regions and different species can be surprising reliable [1, 2, 5, 7-9, 14, 17, 18], 
186 A. C. Tang, B. A. Pearlmutter, T. A. Hely, M. Zibulevsky and M. P Weisend 
on the order of a few milliseconds. Due to the low spatial resolution of electroen- 
cephalography (EEG) and the requirement of signal averaging due to noisiness of 
magnetoencephalography (MEG), in vivo measurement of human populational re- 
sponse time variability from different processing stages has not been available. 
In four visual reaction time (RT) tasks, we estimated neuronal response time vari- 
ability at different visual processing stages using MEG. One major obstacle that has 
prevented the analysis of response timing variability using MEG before is the rela- 
tive weakness of the brain's magnetic signals (100fT) compared to noise in a shielded 
environment (magnetized lung contaminants: 106fT; abdominal currents 105fT; car- 
diogram and oculogram: 104fT; epileptic and spontaneous activity: 10afT) and in 
the sensors (10fT) [13]. Consequently, neuronal responses evoked during cognitive 
tasks often require signal averaging across many trials, making analysis of single- 
trial response times unfeasible. 
Recently, Bell-Sejnowski Infomax [1995] and Fast ICA [10] algorithms have been 
used successfully to isolate and remove major artifacts from EEG and MEG data 
[11, 15, 20]. These methods greatly increase the effective signal-to-noise ratio and 
make single-trial analysis of EEG data feasible [12]. Here, we applied a Second- 
Order Blind Identification algorithm (SOBI) [4] (another blind source separation, or 
BSS, algorithm) to MEG data to find out whether populational response variability 
changes from early to late visual processing stages. 
2 Methods 
2.1 Experimental Design 
Two volunteer normal subjects (females, right handed) with normal or corrected- 
to-normal visual acuity and binocular vision participated in four different visual RT 
tasks. Subjects gave informed consent prior to the experimental procedure. During 
each task we recorded continuous MEG signals at a 300Hz sampling rate with a 
band-pass filter of 1-100Hz using a 122 channel Neuromag-122. 
In all four tasks, the subject was presented with a pair of abstract color patterns, 
one in the left and the other in the right visual field. One of the two patterns was a 
target pattern. The subject pressed either a left or right mouse button to indicate on 
which side the target pattern was presented. When a correct response was given, a 
low or high frequency tone was presented binaurally following respectively a correct 
or wrong response. The definition of the target pattern varied in the four tasks and 
was used to control task difficulty which ranged from easy (task 1) to more difficult 
(task 4) with increasing RTs. (The specific differences among the four tasks are not 
important for the analysis which follows and are not discussed further.) 
In this study we focus on the one element that all tasks have in common, i.e. ac- 
tivation of multiple visual areas along the visual pathways. Our goal is to identify 
visual neuronal sources activated in all four visual RT tasks and to measure and 
compare response time variability between neuronal sources associated with early 
and later visual processing stages. Specifically, we test the hypothesis that popula- 
tional neuronal response times increase from early to later visual processing stages. 
2.2 Source Separation Using SOBI 
In MEG, magnetic activity from different neuronal populations is observed by many 
sensors arranged around the subject's head. Each sensor responds to a mixture of 
the signals emitted by multiple sources. We used the Second-Order Blind Identi- 
MEG Study of Response Latency and Variability 187 
fication algorithm (SOBI) [4] (a BSS algorithm) to simultaneously separate neu- 
romagnetic responses from different neuronal populations associated with different 
stages of visual processing. Responses from different neuronal populations will be 
referred to as source responses and the neuronal populations that give rise to these 
responses will be referred to as neuronal sources or simply sources. These neu- 
tonal sources often, but not always, consist of a spatially contiguous population of 
neurons. BSS separates the measured sensor signals into maximally independent 
components, each having its own spatial map. Previously we have shown that some 
of these BSS separated components correspond to noise sources, and many others 
correspond to neuronal sources [19]. 
To establish the identity of the components, we analyzed both temporal and spa- 
tial properties of the BSS separated components. Their temporal properties are 
displayed using MEG images, similar to the ERP images described by [12] but 
without smoothing across trials. These MEG images show stimulus or response 
locked responses across many trials in a map, from which response latencies across 
all displayed trials can be observed with a glance. The spatial properties of the sep- 
arated components are displayed using a field map that shows the sensor projection 
of a given component. The intensity at each point on the field map indicates how 
strongly this component influences the sensor at this location. 
The correspondence between the separated components and neuronal populational 
responses at different visual processing stages were established by considering both 
spatial and temporal properties of the separated components [19]. For example, 
a component was identified as an early visual neuronal source if and only if (1) 
the field pattern, or the sensor projection, of the separated component showed 
a focal response over the occipital lobe, and (2) the ERP image showed visual 
stimulus locked responses with latencies shorter than all other visual components 
and falling within the range of early visual responses reported in studies using 
other methods. Only those components consistent both spatially and temporally 
with known neurophysiology and neuroanatomy were identified as neuronal sources. 
2.3 Single Event Detection and Response Latency Estimation 
For all established visual components we calculated the single-trial response latency 
as follows. First, a detection window was defined using the stimulus-triggered av- 
erage (STA). The beginning of the detection window was defined by the time at 
which the STA first exceeded the range of baseline fluctuation. Baseline fluctuation 
was estimated from the time of stimulus onset for approximately 50ms (the visual 
response occurred no earlier than 60ms after stimulus onset.) The detection win- 
dow ended when the STA first returned to the same level as when the detection 
window began. The detection threshold was determined using a control window 
with the same width as the detection window, but immediately preceding the de- 
tection window. The threshold was adjusted until no more than five false detections 
occurred within the control window for each ninety trials. We estimated RTs using 
the leading edge of the response, rather than the time of the peak as this is more 
robust against noise. 
3 Results 
In both subjects across all four visual RT tasks, SOBI generated components that 
corresponded to neuronal populational responses associated with early and late 
stages of visual processing. In both subjects, we identified a single component with 
a sensor projection at the occipital lobe whose latency was the shortest among all 
188 A. C. Tang, B. A. Pearlmutter, T. A. Hely, M. Zibulevsky and M. P. Weisend 
task 
1 
2 
3 
4 
early source late source 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Figure 1: MEG images and field maps for an early and a late source from each 
task, for subject 1 (top) and subject 2 (bottom). MEG image pixels are brightness- 
coded source strength. Ea
