Graph Matching with Hierarchical 
Discrete Relaxation 
Richard C. Wilson and Edwin R. Hancock 
Department of Computer Science, University of York 
York, Y01 5DD, UK. 
Abstract 
Our aim in this paper is to develop a Bayesian flamework for match- 
ing hierarchical relational models. The goal is to make discrete la- 
bel assignments so as to optimise a global cost function that draws 
information concerning the consistency of match from different lev- 
els of the hierarchy. Our Bayesian development naturally distin- 
guishes between intra-level and inter-level constraints. This allows 
the impact of reassigning a match to be assessed not only at its 
own (or peer) level of representation, but also upon its parents and 
children in the hierarchy. 
I Introduction 
Hierarchical graphical structures are of critical importance in the interpretation of 
sensory or perceptual data. For instance, following the influential work of Marr [6] 
there has been sustained efforts at effectively organising and processing hierarchical 
information in vision systems. There are a plethora of concrete examples which in- 
clude pyramidal hierarchies [3] that are concerned with multi-resolution information 
processing and conceptual hierarchies [4] which are concerned with processing at 
different levels of abstraction. Key to the development of techniques for hierarchical 
information processing is the desire to exploit not only the intra-level constraints 
applying at the individual levels of representation but also inter-level constraints 
operating between different levels of the hierarchy. If used effectively these inter- 
level constraints can be brought to bear on the interpretation of uncertain image 
entities in such a way as to improve the fidelity of interpretation achieved by single 
level means. Viewed as an additional information source, inter-level constraints can 
be used to resolve ambiguities that would persist if single-level constraints alone 
were used. 
690 R. C. Wilson and E. R. Hancock 
In the connectionist literature graphical structures have been widely used to repre- 
sent probabilistic causation in hierarchical systems [5, 9]. Although this literature 
has provided a powerful battery of techniques, they have proved to be of limited use 
in practical sensory processing systems. The main reason for this is that the under- 
pinning independence assumptions and the resulting restrictions on graph topology 
are rarely realised in practice. In particular there are severe technical problems in 
dealing with structures that contain loops or are not tree-like. One way to overcome 
this difficulty is to edit intractable structures to produce tractable ones [8]. 
Our aim in this paper is to extend this discrete relaxation flamework to hierarchi- 
cal graphical structures. We develop a label-error process to model the violation of 
both inter-level and intra-level constraints. These two sets of constraints have dis- 
tinct probability distributions. Because we are concerned with directly comparing 
the topology graphical structures rather than propagating causation, the result- 
ing framework is not restricted by the topology of the hierarchy. In/particular , 
we illustrate the effectiveness of the method on amoral graphs used to represent 
scene-structure in an image interpretation problem. This is a heterogeneous struc- 
ture [2, 4] in which different label types and different classes of constraint operate 
at different levels of abstraction. This is to be contrasted with the more familiar 
pyramidal hierarchy which is effectively homogeneous [1, 3]. Since we are deal- 
ing with discrete entities inter-level information communication is via a symbolic 
interpretation of the objects under consideration. 
2 Hierarchical Consistency 
The hierarchy consists of a number of levels, each containing objects which are 
fully described by their children at the level below. Formally each level is described 
by an attributed relational graph G t = (Vt,Et,Xt), Vl E L, with L being the 
index-set of levels in the hierarchy; the indices t and b are used to denote the 
top and bottom levels of the hierarchy respectively. According to our notation for 
level 1 of the hierarchy, V t is the set of nodes, E t is the set of intra-level edges 
and X t = {_x, Vu E V t } is a set of unary attributes residing on the nodes. The 
children or descendents which form the representation of an element j at a lower 
level are denoted by/)j. In other words, if u t-1 is in/)j then there is a link in the 
hierarchy between element j at level I and element u at level I - 1. According to 
our assumptions, the elements of/)j are drawn exclusively from V t-. The goal of 
performing relaxation operations is to find the match between scene graph G and 
model graph G2. At each individual level of the hierarchy this match is represented 
by a mapping function ft, VI  L, where fl : V1 l ._ V2I. 
The development of a hierarchical consistency measure proceeds along a similar 
line to the single-level work of Wilson and Hancock [10]. The quantity of interest is 
the MAP estimate for the mapping function f given the available unary attributes, 
i.e. f = argmax.P(ft,v1  LIXt,VI  L). We factorize the measurement infor- 
mation over the set of nodes by application of Bayes rule under the assumption of 
measurement independence on the nodes. As a result 
P(ft,Vl  LIXt,VI  L) = p(Xt VIe L) H H P(x[lft(u)) P(ft'Vl  L) (1) 
' IL uV t 
The critical modelling ingredient in developing a discrete relaxation scheme from the 
above MAP criterion is the joint prior for the mapping function, i.e. P(ft, Vl  L) 
Graph Matching with Hierarchical Discrete Relaxation 691 
Children 
I 2 3 A B C 
Possible mappings of children: 1,2,3 ---- A,B,C 
C,B,A 
Figure 1: Example constrained children mappings 
which represents the influence of structural information on the matching process. 
The joint measurement density, p(X t, Vl E L), on the other hand is a fixed property 
of the hierarchy and can be eliminated from further consideration. 
Raw perceptual information resides on the lowest level of the hierarchy. Our task 
is to propagate this information upwards through the hierarchy. To commence our 
development, we assume that individual levels are conditionally dependent only on 
the immediately adjacent descendant and ancestor levels. This assumption allows 
the factorisation of the joint probability in a manner analogous to a Markov chain 
[3]. Since we wish to draw information from the bottom upwards, the factoflsa- 
tion commences from the highest level of labelling. The expression for the joint 
probability of the hierarchical labelling is 
P(ft,Vl e L)-- P(f') H P(ft+zlft) (2) 
We can now focus our attention on the conditional probabilities p(fl+l[fl). These 
quantities express the probability of a labelling at the level l + 1 given the previously 
defined labelling at the descendant level I. We develop tractable expressions for 
these probabilities by decomposing the hierarchical graph into convenient structural 
units. Here we build on the idea of decomposing single-level graphs into super- 
cliques that was successfully exploited in our previous work [10]. Super-cliques are 
the sets of nodes connected to a centre-object by intra-level edges. However, in the 
hierarchical case the relational units are more complex since we must also consider 
the graph-structure conveyed by inter-level edges. 
We follow the philosophy adopted in the single-level case [10] by averaging the super- 
clique probabilities to estimate the conditional matching probabilities p(fl+ 
If F C fl denotes the current match of the super-clique centred on the object 
j  V/then we write 
1 
P(f'lf t-) --iVll  P(F}lf t-x) (3) 
jV  
In order to model this probability, we require a dictionary of constraint relations for 
the corresponding graph sub-units (super-cliques) from the model graph G2. The 
allowed mappings between the model graph and the data graph which preserve the 
topology of the graph structure at a particular level of representation are referred 
692 R. C. Wilson and E. R. Hancock 
to as structure preserving mappings or SPM's. It is important to note that we 
need only explore those mappings which are topologically identical to the super- 
clique centred on object j and therefore the possible mappings of the child nodes are 
heavily constrained by the mappings of their parents (Figure 1). We denote the set 
of SPM's by 7 >. Since the set 7 > is effectively the state-space of legal matching, we 
can apply the Bayes theorem to compute the conditional super-clique probability 
in the following manner 
P(I'tJ [f'-1) = E P(F} IS'ft-1)P(Slft-) (4) 
s 'p 
According to this expression, there are two distinct components to our model. The 
first involves the comparison between our mapped realisation of the super-clique 
from graph G1, i.e. Ftj, with the selected unit from graph G2 and the mapping 
from level 1 - 1. Here we take the view that once we have hypothesised a particular 
mapping S from P, the mapping ft- provides us with no further information, i.e. 
P(r}[$, ft-1) _ p(rt[S). The matched super-clique I'tj is conditionally independent 
given a mapping from the set of SPM's and we may write the first term as P(F} IS). 
In other words, this first conditional probability models only intra-level constraints. 
The second term is the significant one in evaluating the impact inter-level constraints 
on the labelling at the previous level. In this term the probability of the hypothesised 
mapping $ is conditioned according to the match of the child level I. 
All that remains now is to evaluate the conditional probabilities. Under the as- 
sumption of memoryless matching errors, the first term may be factorised over 
the marginal probabilities for the assigned matches 3' on the individual nodes of 
the matched super-clique I' given their counterparts si belonging to the structure 
pres
