A Critical Comparison of Models for 
Orientation and Ocular Dominance 
Columns in the Striate Cortex 
E. Erwin 
Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois 
Urbana, IL 61801, USA 
K. Obermayer 
Technische FakultKt 
UniversitKt Bielefeld 
33615 Bielefeld, FRG 
K. Schulten 
Beckman Institute 
University of Illinois 
Urbana, IL 61801, USA 
Abstract 
More than ten of the most prominent models for the structure 
and for the activity dependent formation of orientation and ocu- 
lar donfinance columns in the striate cortex have been evaluated. 
We implemented those models on parallel machines, we extensively 
explored parameter space, and we quantitatively compared model 
predictions with experimental data which were recorded optically 
from macaque striate cortex. 
In our contribution we present a summary of our results to date. 
Briefly, we find that (i) despite apparent differences, many models 
are based on similar principles and, consequently, make similar pre- 
dictions, (ii) certain pattern models as well as the developmental 
correlation-based learning models disagree with the experimen- 
tal data, and (iii) of the models we have investigated, competitive 
Hebbian models and the recent model of Swindale provide the 
best match with experimental data. 
1 Models and Data 
The models for the formation and structure of orientation and ocular dominance 
columns which we have investigated are summarized in table 1. Models fall into 
two categories: Pattern models whose aim is to achieve a concise description of 
the observed patterns and developmental models which are focussed on the pro- 
94 E. Erwin, K. Obermayer, K. Schulten 
Class Type Model Reference 
Pattern Structural 1. Icecube Hubel and Wiesel 1977 [9] 
Models Models 2. Pinwheel Braitenberg and Braitenberg 1979 [6] 
3. G6tz G6tz 1987 [8] 
4. Baxter Baxter and Dow 1989 [1] 
Spectral 5. Rojer Rojer and Schwartz 1990 [20] 
Models 6. Niebur Niebur and W6rg6tter 1993 [15] 
7. Swindale Swindale 1992a [21] 
Develop. Correlation 8. Linsker Linsker 1986c [12] 
Models Based Learning 9. Miller Miller 1989, 1994 [13, 14] 
Competitive 10. SOM-h Obermayer, et. al. 1990 [19] 
Hebbian 11. SOM-1 Obermayer, et. al. 1992 [17] 
12. EN Durbin and Mitchison 1990 [7] 
Other 13. Tana 'ka Tanaka 1991 [22] 
14. Yuille Yuille, et. al. 1992 [23] 
Table 1: Models of visual cortical maps which have been evaluated. 
cesses underlying their formation. Pattern models conhe in two varieties, str,ctural 
models and spectral models, which describe orientation and ocular dominance 
lnaps in real and in Fourier space, respectively. Developmental models fall into the 
categories correlations based learning, competitive Hebbian learning and a few 
miscellaneous models. 
Models are compared with data obtained from macaque striate cortex through opti- 
cal imaging [2, 3, 4, 16]. Data were recorded from the representation of the parafovea 
fro,n the superficial layers of cortex. In the following we will state that a particular 
model reproduces a particular feature of the experimental data (i) if there exists a 
parameter regime where the model generates appropriate patterns and (ii} if the 
phenomena are robust. We will state that a particular model does not reproduce a 
certain feature (i) if we have not found an appropriate parameter regine and (ii) if 
there exists either a proof or good intuitive reasons that a model cannot reproduce 
this feature. 
One has to keep in mind, though, that model predictions are compared with a fairly 
special set of data. Ocular dominance patterns, e.g., are known to vary between 
species and even between different regions within area 17 of an individual. Con- 
sequently, a model which does not reproduce certain features of ocular dominance 
or orientation columns in the macaque may well describe those patterns in other 
species. Interspecies differences, however, are not the focus of this contribution; 
results of corresponding modelling studies will be reported elsewhere. 
2 Examples of Organizing Principles and Model Predictions 
It has been suggested that the ,nost inportant principles underlying the pattern of 
orientation and ocular dominance are continuity and diversity [7. 19, 21]. Con- 
tinuity, because early image processing is often local in feature space, and diversity, 
because, e.g., the visual system may want to avoid perceptual scotomata. The con- 
tinuity and diversity principles underlie almost all descriptive and developmental 
A Critical Comparison of Models for Orientation and Ocular Dominance Columns 95 
Figure 1: Typical patterns of orientation preferences as they are predicted by six 
of the models listed in Table 1. Orientation preferences are coded by gray values, 
where black --, white denotes preferences for vertical --, horizontal --, vertical. Top 
row (left to right): Models 7, 11, 9. Bottom row (left to right) Models 5, 12, 8. 
models, but maps which comply with these principles often differ in qualitative ways: 
The icecube model, e.g., obeys both principles but contains no singularities in the 
orientation preference map and no branching of ocular dominance bands. Figure 1 
shows orientation maps generated by six different algorithms taken from Tab. 1. 
Although all patterns are consistent with the continuity and diversity constraints, 
closer comparison reveals differences. Thus additional elements of organization must 
be considered. 
It has been suggested that maps are characterized by local correlations and global 
disorder. Figure 2 (left) shows as an example two-point correlation functions of 
orientation maps. The autocorrelation function [17] of one of the Cartesian coor- 
dinat, es of the orientation vector is plotted as a fimction of cortical distance. The 
fact, that all correlation functions decay indicates that the orientation map exhibits 
global disorder. Global disorder is predicted by all models except. the early pat- 
tern models 6, 8 and 9. Figure 2 (right) shows the corresponding power spectra. 
Bandpass-like spectra which are typical for the experimental data [16] are well pre- 
dicted by models 10-12. Interestingly, they are not, predicted by model 9, which 
also fails reproducing the Mexican-hat shaped correlation functions (bold lines), 
and model 13. 
Based on the fact that experimental maps are characterized by a bandpass-like 
power spectrum it has been suggested that orientation naps Inay be organized 
96 E. Erwin, K. Obermayer, K. Schulten 
0 10 20 30 40 
distance (normalized) 
1,0 
0,6 
0 S 10 1S 20 
distance (normalized) 
Figure 2: Left: Spatial autocorrelation functions for one of the cartesian coordi- 
nates of the orientation vector. Autocorrelation functions were averaged over all 
directions. Right: Complex power spectra of orientation lnaps. Power was aver- 
aged over all directions of the wave vector. Model nulnbers as in Tab. 1. 
according to four principles [15]: continuity, diversity, homogeneity and isotropy. 
If those principles are inplenented using bandpass filtered noise the resulting 
naps [15, 21] indeed share nany properties with the experimental data. Above 
principles alone, however, are not sufficient: (i) There are models such as model .5 
which are based on those principles but generate different patterns, (ii) homogene- 
ity and isotropy are hardly ever fulfilled ([16] and next paragraph), and (iii) those 
principles cannot account for correlations between maps of various response prop- 
erties [16]. 
Maps of orientation and ocular dominance in the macaque are anisotropic, i.e., 
there exist preferred directions along which orientation and ocular dominance slabs 
align [16]. Those alfisotropies can emerge due to different nechanisms: (i) sponta- 
neous symlnetry breaking, (ii) model equations, which are not rotation invariant, 
and (iii) appropriately chosen boundary conditions. Figure 3 illustrates mecha- 
nislns (ii) and (iii) for model 11. Both mechanisms indeed predict anisotropic 
patterns, however, preferred directions of orientation and ocular dolninance align in 
both cases (fig. 3, left and center). This is not true for the experimental data, where 
preferred directions tend to be orthogonal [16]. Orthogonal preferred directions can 
be generated by using different neighborhood functions for different components of 
the feature vector (fig. 3, right). However, this is not a satisfactory solution, and 
the issue of anisotropies is still unsolved. 
The pattern of orientation preference in the area 17 of the macaque exhibits folr 
local elements of organization: linear zones, singularities, saddle points and frac- 
tures [16]. Those elements are correctly predicted by most of the l)attern models, 
except, models 1-3, and they appear in the maps generated by models 10-14. In- 
terestingly, models 9 and 13 predict very few linear zones, which is related to the 
fact, that, those models generate orientation maps with lowpass-like power spectra. 
Another important property of orientation 1naps is that orientation preferences and 
their spatial layout across cortex are not correlated which each other. One conse- 
A Critical Comparison of Models for Orientation and Ocular Dominance Columns 9 7 
q- 
Figure 3: Anisotropic orientation and ocular dominance maps generated by model 
11. The figure shows Fourier spectra [17] of orientation (top row) and ocular dom- 
inance maps (bottom row). Left: Maps generated with an elliptic neighborhood 
function (case (ii), see text); Center: Maps generated using circular input lay- 
ers and an elliptical cortical sheet (case (iii), see text), Right: Maps generated 
with different, elliptic neighborhood functions for orientation preference and ocular 
dominance. '+' symbols indicate the locations of the origin. 
quence is that there exist singularities, near which the curl of the orientation vector 
field does not vanish (fig. 4, left). This rules out a class of pattern models where the 
orientation map is deriv
