A Framework for Non-rigid Matching 
and Correspondence 
Suguna Pappu, Steven Gold, and Anand Rangarajan 1 
Departments of Diagnostic Radiology and Computer Science 
and the Yale Neuroengineering and Neuroscience Center 
Yale University New Haven, CT 06520-8285 
Abstract 
Matching feature point sets lies at the core of many approaches to 
object recognition. We present a framework for non-rigid match- 
ing that begins with a skeleton module, affine point matching, 
and then integrates multiple features to improve correspondence 
and develops an object representation based on spatial regions to 
model local transformations. The algorithm for feature matching 
iteratively updates the transformation parameters and the corre- 
spondence solution, each in turn. The aftme mapping is solved in 
closed form, 'which permits its use for data of any dimension. The 
correspondence is set via a method for two-way constraint satisfac- 
tion, called softassign, which has recently emerged from the neural 
network/statistical physics realm. The complexity of the non-rigid 
matching algorithm with multiple features is the same as that of 
the affine point matching algorithm. Results for synthetic and real 
world data are provided for point sets in 2D and 3D, and for 2D 
data with multiple types of features and parts. 
I Introduction 
A basic problem of object recognition is that of matching- how to associate sensory 
data with the representation of a known object. This entails finding a transforma- 
tion that maps the features of the object model onto the image, while establishing a 
correspondence between the spatial features. However, a tractable class of transfor- 
mation, e.g., affine, may not be sufficient if the object is non-rigid or has relatively 
independent parts. If there is noise or occlusion, spatial information alone may 
not be adequate to determine the correct correspondence. In our previous work in 
spatial point matching [1], the 2D arline transformation was decomposed into its 
e-mail address of authors: lastname-firstname@cs.yMe.edu 
796 S. PAPPU, S. GOLD, A. RANGARAJAN 
physical component elements, which does not generalize easily to 3D, and so, only 
a rigid 3D transformation was considered. 
We present a framework for non-rigid matching that begins with solving the basic 
affine point matching problem. The algorithm iteratively updates the affine pa- 
rameters and correspondence in turn, each as a function of the other. The affine 
transformation is solved in closed form, which lends tremendous flexibility- the 
formulation can be used in 2D or 3D. The correspondence is solved by using a 
softassign [1] procedure, in which the two-way assignment constraints are solved 
without penalty functions. The accuracy of the correspondence is improved by the 
integration of multiple features. A method for non-rigid parameter estimation is 
developed, based on the assumption of a well-articulated model with distinct re- 
gions, each of which may move in an affine fashion, or can be approximated as 
such. Umeyama [3] has done work on parameterized parts using an exponential 
time tree search technique, and Wakahara [4] on local affine transforms, but neither 
integrates multiple features nor explicitly considers the non-rigid matching case, 
while expressing a one-to-one correspondence between points. 
2 Aftinc Point Matching 
The affine point matching problem is formulated as an optimization problem for 
determining the correspondence and affine transformation between feature points. 
Given two sets of data points )j G R -1, n = 3, 4..., j = 1,..., J, the image, 
and I) G R -, n - 3, 4,..., k = 1,..., K, the model, find the correspondence and 
associated arline transformation that best maps a subset of the image points onto a 
subset of the model point set. These point sets are expressed in homogeneous coor- 
dinates, Xj = (1,)j), Y -- (1, I7). { aij } -- A G R  x is the affine transformation 
matrix. Note that{aj - 0 Vj} because of the homogeneous coordinates. Define the 
match variable Mj where Mj  [0, 1]. For a given match matrix {Mj}, transfor- 
mation A and I, an identity matrix of dimension n, j, Mj[IX j - (A + I)Y[I 2 
expresses the similarity between the point sets. The term -a j, Mj, with pa- 
rameter a > 0 is appended to this to encourage matches (else Mj = 0 V j, k 
minimizes the function). To limit the range of transformations, the terms of the 
affine matrix are regularized via a term )dr(ATA) in the objective function, with 
parameter A, where tr(.) denotes the trace of the matrix. Physically, Xj may fully 
match to one Y, partially match to several, or may not match to any point. A sim- 
ilar constraint holds for Y. These are expressed as the constraints in the following 
optimization problem: 
(1) 
To begin, slack variables Mj,K+ and Ms+, are introduced so that the in- 
-,J+l Mj k 
equality constraints can be transformed into equality constraints: z_j-1 -- 
, v'K+ Mj -- 1, Vj. Mj,K+ -- i indicates that Xj does not match to 
1 Vk and z_,=l 
any point in Y. An equivalent unconstrained optimization problem to (2) is de- 
rived by relaxing the constraints via Lagrange parameters/j, v, and introducing 
an x log x barrier function, indexed by a parameter fl. A similar technique was used 
A Framework for Nonrigid Matching and Correspondence 797 
[2] to solve the assignment problem. The energy function used is: 
J K+I 
min ,,v EMjIIXj -(A + I)YII2 + Atr(ATA)-aE Mj + EPJ(E Mj 1) 
A,M 
j, j, J =. 
K J+l i J+l K+I 
k j--1 j--1 k--1 
This is to be minimized with respect to the match variables and affine parameters 
while satisfying the constraints via Lagrange parameters. Using the recently devel- 
oped softassign technique, we satisfy the constraints explicitly. When A is fixed, 
we have an assignment problem. Following the development in [1], the assignment 
constraints are satisfied using softassign, a technique for satisfying two-way (as- 
signment) constraints without a penalty term that is analogous to softmax which 
enforces a one-way constraint. First, the match variables are initialized: 
= exp(-/311Xj - + ,4)Y11 - -) (2) 
This is followed by repeated row-column normalization of the match variables until 
a stopping criterion is reached: 
then 
When the correspondence between the two point sets is fixed, A can be solved in 
closed form, by holding M fixed in the objective function, and differentiating and 
solving for A: 
The algorithm is summarized as: 
(4) 
1. INITIALIZE: Variables: A = 0, M = 0 
Parameters: /3initial,/3update,/3final T- Inner loop iterations, A 
2. ITERATE: Do T times for a fixed value of/3 
Softassign: Re-initialize M*(A) and then (Eq. 2) until AM small 
A*(M) updated (Eq. 4) 
3. UPDATE: While/3 </3nal,/3 '-/3 */3update, Return to 2. 
The complexity of the algorithm is O(JK). Starting with small/3initial permits 
many partial correspondences in the initial solution for M. As /3 increases the 
correspondence becomes more refined. For large/3final, M approaches a permutation 
matrix (adjusting appropriately for the slack variables). 
3 Nonrigid Feature Matching: Affine Quilts 
Recognition of an object requires many different types of information working in 
concert. Spatial information alone may not be sufficient for representation, espe- 
cially in the presence of noise. Additionally the affine transformation is limited in 
its inability to handle local variation in an object, due to the object's non-rigidity 
or to the relatively independent movement of its parts, e.g., in human movement. 
The optimization problem (2) easily generalizes to integrate multiple invariant fea- 
tures. A representation with multiple features has a spatial component indicating 
798 S. PAPPU, S. GOLD, A. RANGARAJAN 
the location of a feature element. At that location, there may be invariant geomet- 
ric characteristics, e.g., this point belongs on a curve, or non-geometric invariant 
features such as color, and texture. Let Xjr be the value of feature r associated 
with point Xj. The location of point Xj is the null feature. There are R features 
associated with each point Xj and Y. Note that the match variable remains the 
same. The new objective function is identical to the original objective function, 
(2), appended by the term y'j,k,rMjkwr(Xjr -- Ykr) 2. The (Xjr - Ykr) 2 quan- 
tity captures the similarity between invariant types of features, with wr a weight- 
ing factor for feature r. Non-invariant features are not considered. In this way, 
the point matching algorithm is modified only in the re-initialization of M(A): 
Mj = exp(-fi(llX y - (I q- A)Yll 2 q- Er wr(X - y)2 _ )) The rest of the 
algorithm remains unchanged. 
Decomposition of spatial transformations motivates classification of the B individual 
regions of an object and use of a quilt of local aftinc transformations. In the 
multiple aftinc scenario, membership to a region is known on the well-articulated 
model, but not on the image set. It is assumed that all points that are members 
of one region undergo the same aftinc transformation. The model changes by the 
addition of one subscript to the affine matrix, Ab() where b(k) is an operator that 
indicates which transformation operates on point k. In the algorithm, during the 
A(M) update, instead of a single update, B updates are done. Denote K(b) - 
{klb(k ) = b}, i.e., all the points that are within region b. Then in the affine update, 
Ab = A;(M) = (y'5, eK(b) Mi(XsY T - YYT))(Zj, eK(,) MjYY T + A,I) - 
However, the theoretical complexity does not change, since the B updates still only 
require summing over the points. 
4 Experimental Results: Hand Drawn and Synthetic 
The speed for matching point sets of 50 points each is around 20 seconds on an SGI 
workstation with a R4400 processor. This is true for points in 2D, 3D and with 
extra features. This can be improved with a tradeoff in accuracy by adopting a 
looser
