Call-based Fraud Detection in Mobile 
Communication Networks using a Hierarchical 
Regime-Switching Model 
Jaakko Hollm(n 
Helsinki University of Technology 
Lab. of Computer and Information Science 
P.O. Box 5400, 02015 HUT, Finland 
Jaakko.Hollmen@hut.fi 
Volker Tresp 
Siemens AG, Corporate Technology 
Dept. Information and Communications 
81730 Munich, Germany 
Volker. Treslmchp.siemens.de 
Abstract 
Fraud causes substantial losses to telecommunication carriers. Detec- 
tion systems which automatically detect illegal use of the network can be 
used to alleviate the problem. Previous approaches worked on features 
derived from the call patterns of individual users. In this paper we present 
a call-based detection system based on a hierarchical regime-switching 
model. The detection problem is formulated as an inference problem on 
the regime probabilities. Inference is implemented by applying the junc- 
tion tree algorithm to the underlying graphical model. The dynamics are 
learned from data using the EM algorithm and subsequent discriminative 
training. The methods are assessed using fraud data from a real mobile 
communication network. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Fraud is costly to a network carrier both in terms of lost income and wasted capacity. It has 
been estimated that the telecommunication industry looses approximately 2-5% of its total 
revenue to fraud. The true losses are expected to be even higher since telecommunication 
companies are reluctant to admit fraud in their systems. A fraudulent attack causes lots of 
inconveniences to the victimized subscriber which might motivate the subscriber to switch 
to a competing carrier. Furthermore, potential new customers would be very reluctant to 
switch to a carrier which is troubled with fraud. 
Mobile communication networks --which are the focus of this work-- are particularly 
appealing to fraudsters as the calling from the mobile terminal is not bound to a physical 
place and a subscription is easy to get. This provides means for an illegal high-profit 
business requiring minimal investment and relatively low risk of getting caught. Fraud is 
890 d. Hollmbn and V. Tresp 
usually initiated by a mobile phone theft, by cloning the mobile phone card or by acquiring 
a subscription with false identification. After intrusion the subscription can be used for 
gaining free services either for the intruder himself or for his illegal customers in form of 
call-selling. In the latter case, the fraudster sells calls to customers for reduced rates. 
The earliest means of detecting fraud were to register overlapping calls originating from 
one subscription, evidencing card cloning. While this procedure efficiently detects cloning, 
it misses a large share of other fraud cases. A more advanced system is a velocity trap which 
detects card cloning by using an upper speed limit at which a mobile phone user can travel. 
Subsequent calls from distant places provide evidence for card cloning. Although a velocity 
trap is a powerful method of detecting card cloning, it is ineffective against other types of 
fraud. Therefore there is great interest in detection systems which detect fraud based on 
an analysis of behavioral patterns (Barson et al., 1996, Burge et al., 1997, Fawcett and 
Provost, 1997, Taniguchi et al., 1998). 
In an absolute analysis, a user is classified as a fraudster based on features derived from 
daily statistics summarizing the call pattern such as the average number of calls. In a differ- 
ential analysis, the detection is based on measures describing the changes in those features 
capturing the transition from a normal use to fraud. Both approaches have the problem 
of finding efficient feature representations describing normal and fraudulent behavior. As 
they usually derive features as summary statistics over one day, they are plagued with a 
latency time of up to a day to detect fraudulent behavior. The resulting delay in detection 
can already lead to unacceptable losses and can be exploited by the fraudster. For these 
reasons real-time fraud detection is seen to be the most important development in fraud 
detection (Pequeno, 1997). 
In this paper we present a real-time fraud detection system which is based on a stochastic 
generative model. In the generative model we assume a variable victimized which indicates 
if the account has been victimized by a fraudster and a second variable fraud which indi- 
cates if the fraudster is currently performing fraud. Both variables are hidden. Furthermore, 
we have an observed variable call which indicates if a call being is performed or not. The 
transition probabilities from no-call to call and from call to no-call are dependent on the 
state of the variable fraud. Overall, we obtain a regime-switching time-series model as de- 
scribed by Hamilton (1994), with the modifications that first, the variables in the time series 
are not continuous but binary and second, the switching variable has a hierarchical struc- 
ture. The benefit of the hierarchical structure is that it allows us to model the time-series 
at different time scales. At the lowest hierarchical level, we model the dynamical behavior 
of the individual calls, at the next level the transition from normal behavior to fraudulent 
behavior and at the highest level the transition to being victimized. To be able to model a 
time-series at different temporal resolutions was also the reason for introducing a hierarchy 
into a hidden Markov model for Jordan, Ghahramani and Saul (1997). Fortunately, our 
hidden variables have only a small number of states such that we do not have to work with 
the approximation techniques those authors have introduced. 
Section 2 introduces our hierarchical regime-switching fraud model. The detection prob- 
lem is formulated as an inference problem on the regime probabilities based on subscriber 
data. We derive iterative algorithms for estimating the hidden variables fraud and victim- 
ized based on past and present data (filtering) or based on the complete set of observed 
data (smoothing). We present EM learning rules for learning the parameters in the model 
using observed data. We develop a gradient based approach for fine tuning the emission 
probabilities in the non-fraud state to enhance the discrimination capability of the model. 
In Section 3 we present experimental results. We show that a system which is fine-tuned on 
real data can be used for detecting fraudulent behavior on-line based on the call patterns. 
In Section 4 we present conclusions and discuss further applications and extensions of our 
fraud model. 
Fraud Detection Using a Hierarchical Regime-Switching Model 891 
2 THE HIERARCHICAL REGIME-SWITCHING FRAUD 
MODEL 
2.1 THE GENERATIVE MODEL 
The hierarchical regime-switching model consists of three variables which evolve in time 
stochastically according to first-order Markov chains. The first binary variable vt (victim- 
ized) is equal to one if the account is currently being victimized by a fraudster and zero 
otherwise. The states of this variable evolve according to the state transition probabili- 
ties piVj -- P(vt = ilvt- = j); i,j = 0, 1. The second binary variable st (fraud)is 
equal to one if the fraudster currently performs fraud and is equal to zero if the fraudster 
is inactive. The change between actively performing fraud and intermittent silence is typ- 
ical for a victimized account as is apparent from Figure 3. Note that this transient bursty 
behavior of a victimized account would be difficult to capture with a pure feature based 
approach. The states of this variable evolve following the state transition probabilities 
Pi%k = P(st = i]vt = j, st-i = k, );i,j, k = 0, 1. Finally, the binary variable Yt (call) 
is equal to one if the mobile phone is being used and zero otherwise with state transition 
matrix Pik = P(yt -- ilst - j, Yt- = k); i, j, k = O, 1. Note that this corresponds to the 
assumption of exponentially distributed call duration. Although not quite realistic, this is 
the general assumption in telecommunications. Typically, both the frequency of calls and 
the lengths of the calls are increased when fraud is executed. The joint probability of the 
time series up to time T is then 
T T T 
r(v, r(vo, yo)If 
P(vtlvt-) If P(stlvt'st-1) H P(Ytlst'yt-1) (1) 
t=l t=l t=l 
where in the experiments we used a sampling time of one minute. Furthermore, Vr = 
{vo,...,vr}, ST = {So,...,ST}, YT = {Yo,...,YT} and P(vo, so, Yo) is the prior dis- 
tribution of the initial states. 
Y Yt+ 
Figure 1: Dependency graph of the hierarchical regime-switching fraud model. The square 
boxes denote hidden variables and the circles observed variables. The hidden variable vt 
on the top describes whether the subscriber account is victimized by fraud. The hidden 
variable st indicates if fraud is currently being executed. The state of st determines the 
statistics of the variable call Yt. 
2.2 INFERENCE: FILTERING AND SMOOTHING 
When using the fraud detection system, we are interested to estimate the probability that 
an account is victimized or that fraud is currently occurring based on the call patterns up to 
the current point in time (filtering). We can calculate the probabilities of the states of the 
hidden variables by applying the following equations recursively with t - 1, ..., T. 
892 
P(vt - i, st_ = klYt_ ) = 
EPiP(vt 
l 
d. Hollmdn and V. Tresp 
-1 -- 1,$t-1 -' klYt-i) 
P(vt -- i,$t -- j]Yt-1) -- E p;ikP(vt '-- i,$t-1: klYt-1) 
Y P(vt = i, st - jlYt_l) 
P(vt : i, st = jlYt) -- c .py,;u,_ 
where c is a scaling factor. These equations can be derived from the junction tree algorithm 
for the Bayesian networks (Jensen, 1996). We obtain the probability of victimization and 
fraud by simple marginalization 
j i 
In some cases --in particular for the EM learning rules in the next section-- we might 
be interested in estimating the probabilities of the hidden states at some time in the 
