Analyzing and Visualizing Single-Trial 
Event-Related Potentials 
Tzyy-Ping Jung 1,2, Scott Makeig 2,3, Marissa Westerfield  
Jeanne Townsend , Eric Courchesne , Terrence J. Sejnowski 1, 
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Computational Neurobiology Laboratory 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800, San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
{jung, scott, t erry}salk. edu 
2University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 
3Naval Health Research Center, P.O. Box 85122, San Diego, CA 92186-5122 
Abstract 
Event-related potentials (ERPs), are portions of electroencephalo- 
graphic (EEG) recordings that are both time- and phase-locked 
to experimental events. ERPs are usually averaged to increase 
their signal/noise ratio relative to non-phase locked EEG activ- 
ity, regardless of the fact that response activity in single epochs 
may vary widely in time course and scalp distribution. This study 
applies a linear decomposition tool, Independent Component Anal- 
ysis (ICA) [1], to multichannel single-trial EEG records to derive 
spatial filters that decompose single-trial EEG epochs into a sum 
of temporally independent and spatially fixed components arising 
from distinct or overlapping brain or extra-brain networks. Our 
results on normal and autistic subjects show that ICA can sep- 
arate artifactual, stimulus-locked, response-locked, anal non-event 
related background EEG activities into separate components, al- 
lowing (1) removal of pervasive artifacts of all types from single-trial 
EEG records, and (2) identification of both stimulus- and response- 
locked EEG components. Second, this study proposes a new visual- 
ization tool, the 'ERP image', for investigating variability in laten- 
cies and amplitudes of event-evoked responses in spontaneous EEG 
or MEG records. We show that sorting single-trial ERP epochs in 
order of reaction time and plotting the potentials in 2-D clearly 
reveals underlying patterns of response variability linked to per- 
formance. These analysis and visualization tools appear broadly 
applicable to electrophyiological research on both normal and clin- 
ical populations. 
Analyzing and Visualizing Single-Trial Event-Related Potentials 119 
1 Introduction 
Scalp-recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) are voltage changes in the ongoing 
electroencephalogram (EEG) that are both time- and phase-locked to some exper- 
imental events. These field potentials are usually averaged to increase their sig- 
nal/noise ratio relative to artifacts and other non-phase locked EEG activity. The 
averaging method disregards the fact that in single epochs response activity may 
vary widely in both time course and scalp distribution. These differences are in 
part attributed to different strategies employed by subjects for processing different 
stimuli, to differences in expectation, attention, and arousal occurring in different 
trials, and/or to variations in alertness and fatigue [2, 3]. Single-trial analysis, 
on the other hand, can avoid problems due to time and/or phase shifts and can 
potentially reveal much richer information about event-related brain dynamics in 
endogenous ERPs, but suffers from pervasive artifacts associated with blinks, eye- 
movements, and muscle noise, and poor signal-to-noise ratio arising from the fact 
that non-phase locked background EEG activities often are larger than phase-locked 
response components. 
We present here new methods for analyzing and visualizing multichannel unaver- 
aged single-trial ERP records that alleviate these problems. First, multi-channel 
EEG epochs were analyzed using Independent Component Analysis (ICA), a signal 
processing technique that can decompose multichannel complex data into spatially 
fixed and temporally independent components. Next, a new visualization tool, the 
'ERP image', is introduced for visualizing relations between single-trial ERP records 
and their contributions to the ERP average. To form an ERP image, the recorded 
potentials at one channel are plotted as parallel lines and single-trial ERP epochs 
are sorted in order of reaction time. ICA, applied to the single-trial EEG records 
from normal and autistic subjects in a visual selective attention experiment, derived 
components whose dynamics were affected by stimulus presentations and/or subject 
responses in distinct ways. We demonstrate, through analysis of two sample data 
sets, the power of the proposed analysis and visualization tools for increasing the 
amount and quality of information about event-related brain dynamics that can be 
derived from single-trial EEG data. 
2 Independent Component Analysis of EEG data 
Bell and Sejnowski [5] have proposed a simple neural network algorithm that blindly 
separates mixtures, x, of independent sources, s, using infomax. They showed that 
maximizing the joint entropy, H(y), of the output of a neural processor minimizes 
the mutual information among the output components, yi = g(ui), where g(ui) is 
an invertible bounded nonlinearity and u -- Wx, a version of the original sources, 
s, identical save for scaling and permutation. Lee et al. [1] generalized the infomax 
algorithm to perform blind source separation on linear mixtures of sources with 
either sub- or super-Gaussian distributions. Please see [5, 1] for details regarding 
the algorithms. 
ICA is suitable for performing blind source separation on EEG data because: (1) 
it is plausible that EEG data recorded at multiple scalp sensors are linear sums of 
temporally independent components arising from spatially fixed, distinct or over- 
lapping brain or extra-brain networks, and, (2) spatial smearing of EEG data by 
volume conduction does not involve significant time delays 1. In single-trial EEG 
analysis, the rows of the input matrix x are the EEG signals recorded at different 
electrodes, while the columns are measurements recorded at different time points. 
See [4] for details regarding ICA assumptions underlying EEG analysis. 
120 T.-P dung et al. 
Single--trial ERPs at Cz 
50 
1 O0 
150 
z 200 
250 
300 
35O 
Ordered by RT 
With 20--trial smoothing 
--1 O0 I O0 300 500 700 900 --1 O0 1 O0 300 500 700 900 --1 O0 1 O0 300 500 700 900 
Time (msec) Time (msec) Time (msec) 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
--5 
--10 
--15 
--20 
--25 
LV 
Figure 1: ERP images. (left panel) Single-trial ERPs recorded at a central electrode 
(Cz) and time-locked to onsets of visual target stimuli (vertical left line), plotted with 
subject reaction times (thick black line). (middle panel) The 390 single trials were then 
sorted (bottom to top) in order of increasing reaction time. (right panel) To increase 
signal-to-noise ratio and minimize EEG signals not both time- and phase-locked to the 
experimental events, the trials were averaged vertically using a 30-trial moving window 
advanced in one-trial increments. 
The rows of the independent output data matrix u = Wx are time courses of 
activation of the ICA components, and the columns of the inverse matrix, W -1, 
give the projection strengths of the respective components onto the scalp sensors. 
The scalp topographies of the components provide evidence as to their physiological 
origin (e.g., eye activity should project mainly to frontal sites). EEG signals of in- 
terest (e.g., event-related brain signals) can then be obtained by projecting selected 
ICA components back onto the scalp as x' = (W)-lu ', where u' is the matrix of 
activation waveforms, u, with rows representing activations of irrelevant sources 
set to zero. 
3 Methods and Materials 
EEG data were recorded at 29 scalp electrodes and 2 EOG placements from 2 normal 
and 1 autistic subjects who participated in a 2-hr visual selected attention task in 
which they were instructed to attend to circles flashed in random order at one of 
five locations laterally arrayed 0.8 cm above a central fixation point. Locations were 
outlined by five evenly spaced 1.6-cm blue squares displayed on a black background 
at visual angles of +2.7 deg and +5.5 deg from fixation. Attended locations were 
highlighted through entire 90-sec experimental blocks. Subjects were instructed to 
maintain fixation on the central cross and press a button each time they saw a circle 
in the attended location (see [6] for details). 
4 Results 
The ICA algorithm was applied separately to concatenated 31-channel single-trial 
EEG records from two normal and one autistic subjects. The derived independent 
components had a variety of distinct relations to task events. Some were clearly 
time-locked to stimuli presentations, while others were time-locked to subject re- 
Analyzing and Visualizing Single-Trial Event-Related Potentials 121 
sponses. Still others captured spontaneous EEG activity together with blinks, eye- 
movements, and muscle artifacts, while others accounted for oscillatory and other 
background EEG phenomena. 
4.1 ERP image 
To investigate variability in the latencies and amplitudes of event-evoked responses 
in spontaneous EEG, we here introduce a new visualization tool, the ERP image. An 
example shown in Figure i (left panel) plots 390 single-trial ERP epochs time-locked 
to onsets of target stimuli (vertical left line) and recorded at a central electrode (Cz) 
from a normal subject. Each horizontal trace represents a 1-sec single-trial ERP 
record whose potential variations are plotted in different colors. The thick line 
plots the subject reaction times (RT) in successive trials. Note the trial-to-trial 
fluctuations in ERP latency and reaction time. The ERP average of these trials 
is plotted in the bottom of the panel. Next, the single trials were sorted in order 
of increasing reaction time (Fig. i middle panel), and were them smoothed with a 
30-trial moving average (right panel). Note that, in all but the longest-RT trials, 
the early positive feature (P2) is time-locked to stimulus onset (i.e. is stimulus- 
locked), and that the P3 feature follows RT in nearly all trials (i.e. is response- 
