An Analog VLSI Chip for Finding Edges 
from Zero-crossings 
Wyeth Bair Christof Koch 
Computation and Neural Systems Program 
Caltech 216-76 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
Abstract 
We have designed and tested a one-dimensional 64 pixel, analog CMOS 
VLSI chip which localizes intensity edges in real-time. This device exploits 
on-chip photoreceptors and the natural filtering properties of resistive net- 
works to implement a scheme similar to and motivated by the Difference 
of Gaussians (DOG) operator proposed by Marr and Hildreth (1980). Our 
chip computes the zero-crossings associated with the difference of two ex- 
ponential weighting functions. If the derivative across this zero-crossing 
is above a threshold, an edge is reported. Simulations indicate that this 
technique will extend well to two dimensions. 
I INTRODUCTION 
The zero-crossings of the Laplacian of the Gaussian,72G, are often used for detect- 
ing edges. Marr and Hildreth (1980) argued that the Mexican-hat shape of the X72G 
operator can be approximated by the difference of two Gaussians (DOG). In this 
spirit, we have built a chip that takes the difference of two resistive-network smooth- 
ings of photoreceptor input and finds the resulting zero-crossings. The Green's func- 
tion of the resistive network, a symmetrical decaying exponential, differs from the 
Gaussian filter. Figure I shows the Mexican-hat shape of the DOG superimposed 
on the witch-hat shape of the difference of exponentials (DOE) filter implemented 
by our chip. 
This implementation has the particular advantage of exploiting the smoothing oper- 
ation performed by a linear resistive network, shown in Figure 2. In such a network, 
data voltages d are applied to the nodes along the network via conductances G, and 
the nodes are connected by resistances R. Following Kirchhoff's laws, the network 
399 
400 Bair and Koch 
node voltages v settle to values such that power dissipation is minimized. One 
may think of the network node voltages v as the convolution of the input with the 
symmetrical decaying exponential filter function. The characteristic length of this 
filter function is approximately 1/v/, where G is the data conductance and / 
the network resistance. 
Figure 1' The Mexican-hat shape of the difference of Gaussians (dotted) and the 
witch-hat shape of the filter implemented by our chip. 
Such a network is easily implemented in silicon and avoids the burden of additional 
circuitry which others have used to implement Gaussian kernels. Our simulations 
with digitized camera images show only minor differences between the zero-crossings 
from the DOE filter and those from the DOG. 
di. di di+' 
I+1 
Figure 2: 1-D resistive network. 
2 ANALOG VLSI IMPLEMENTATION 
This chip was implemented with a 2.0tm CMOS n-well process available through the 
MOSIS silicon foundry. Intensity edges are detected using four stages of circuitry: 
photoreceptors capture incoming light, a pair of 1-D resistive networks smooth the 
input image, transconductance amplifiers subtract the smoothed images, and digital 
circuitry detects zero-crossings. Figures 13 and 4 show block diagrams for two pixels 
of the 64 pixel chip. 
An Analog VLSI Chip for Finding Edges from Zero-crossings 401 
Vl Vli+l 
R1 VR1 
1 
VR2 , + VR2 , + 
Vwr Vwr 
l i+ 1 
I i 
Figure 3: Block circuit diagram for two of 64 pixels as described in Section 2. 
402 Bair and Koch 
Processing begins at a line of photoreceptors spaced 100/m apart which encode the 
logarithm of light intensity as a voltage VP, shown in Figure 3. The set of volt- 
ages from the photoreceptors are reported to corresponding nodes of two resistive 
networks via transconductance amplifiers connected as followers. The followers' 
voltage biases, Vox and Vo2, can be adjusted off-chip to independently set the data 
eonduetances for each resistive network. The network resistors are implemented 
as Mead's saturating resistors (Mead, 1989). Voltage biases V/ix and V/t2 allow 
independent off-chip adjustment of the two network resistances. The data conduc- 
tance and network resistance values determine the space constant of the smoothing 
filter which each network implements. The sets of voltages V1 and V2, shown in 
Figure 3, represent the two filtered versions of the image. Wide-range transconduc- 
tance amplifiers (Mead, 1989) produce currents, I, proportional to the difference 
V1 - V2. 
Ji 
t+1 
J I,- li+ J 
XOR 
Vthresh J 
NAND 
Figure 4: Zero-crossing detection and threshold circuitry. 
Figure 4 shows the final stage of processing which detects zero-crossings in the 
sequence of currents I and implements a threshold on the slope of those zero- 
crossings. Currents Ii and Ii+l charge or discharge the inputs of an exclusive 
OR gate. The output of this gate is the first input to a NAND gate which is 
used to implement the threshold. A current proportional to the magnitude of the 
difference Ii - Ii+x charges the second input of the NAND gate, while a threshold 
current discharges this input. If the charging current, representing the slope of the 
zero-crossing, is greater than the threshold current set off-chip by the bias voltage 
Vtarea, this NAND input is charged to logical 1, otherwise, this input is discharged 
to logical 0. The output of the NAND gate, VZi indicates the presence, logical 0, 
or the absence, logical 1, of a zero-crossing with slope greater than Iratech. 
A final stage of circuitry is used to multiplex the sequence of 63 bits, VZ, and 
corresponding currents Ii - Ii+ indicating the slope of the zero-crossings. 
An Analog VLSI Chip for Finding Edges from Zero-crossings 403 
3 BEHAVIOR 
We tested the behavior of the chip by placing a small lens above the silicon wafer 
to focus an image onto the array of photoreceptors. The input light profile that we 
used is shown in Figure 5a. Figure 5b is an oscilloscope trace showing the smoothed 
voltages (V1 and V2 of Figure 3) corresponding to the filtered versions of the image. 
The difference of these two smoothed voltage traces is shown in Figure 5c. Arrows 
indicate the locations of two zero-crossings which the chip reports at the output. 
The reported zero-crossings accurately localize the positions of the edges in the 
image. The trace in Figure 5c crosses zero at other locations, but zero-crossings 
with slope less than the adjustable threshold are masked by the circuitry shown in 
Figure 4. This allows for noise and imperfections in the circuitry and can be used 
to filter out weaker edges which are not relevant to the application. 
Figure 0 shows the response when two fingers are held one meter from the lens 
and swept across the field of view. The fingers appear as bright regions against a 
darker background. The chip accurately localizes the four edges (two per finger) as 
indicated by the pulses below each voltage trace. As the fingers move quickly back 
and forth across the field of view, the image and the zero-crossings follow the object 
with no perceived delay. The measured response time of the chip to the appearance 
of a detectable discontinuity in light intensity varies from about 100/sec in bright 
indoor illumination to about 10msec in a dark room. The time constant is longer 
for lower illumination due to the design of the logarithmic photoreceptor (Mead, 
1080). 
The chip has been proven to be a reliable and robust edge detector through its 
use in two systems. It provides data for a system designed at the Hughes Aircraft 
Artificial Intelligence Center which tracks edges and reports their velocities at over 
300Hz. Also, we have built a hand-held battery powered device which displays the 
locations of edges on a bank of 63 LEDs. This device accurately detects edges 
in many different environments, ranging from a dimly lit room to bright outdoor 
sunlight. 
4 SIMULATIONS OF A 2-D VERSION 
We have used a computer simulation of rectangular networks of ideal linear resistors 
to test the extension of this technique in two dimensions. Results indicate that the 
zero-crossings from the difference of two symmetrical exponential filters are quali- 
tatively similar to those from the DOG. Figure 7 compares the zero-crossing from 
a difference of Gaussians filter (left) to those from a difference of resistive networks 
filter (right). For the DOG, a Gaussian ofa = 1.25 pixels is subtracted from a Gaus- 
sian of a = 0.75 pixels. For the resistive networks, a filter of characteristic length 
i was subtracted from one with characteristic length 1/V. Weaker zero-crossings 
are masked from both output images by thresholding on the slope to emphasize 
comparison of the stronger edges. 
404 Bair and Koch 
(b) 
Figure 5: Chip response to a light bar stimulus. 
Figure 6: Chip response to two moving stimuli. 
An Analog VLSI Chip for Finding Edges from Zero-crossings 405 
-) 
t 
Figure 7: Zero-crossings from the difference of two Gaussians (left) and similar 
output from a difference of decaying exponentials (right). 
5 CONCLUSION 
Our analog VLSI chip shows that finding the thresholded zero-crossings of the 
difference of exponential filters is a robust technique for localizing intensity edges in 
real-time. The robust behavior of the chip in systems to track edges and determine 
velocity demonstrates the usefulness of implementing simple algorithms in analog 
VLSI and the advantages of avoiding large, more general digital systems for these 
purposes. 
Acknowledgements 
Many thanks to Carver Mead. Our laboratory is partially supported by grants 
from the Office of Naval Research, the Rockwell International Science Center and 
the Hughes Aircraft Artificial Intelligence Center. Wyeth Bair is supported by a 
National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship. Thanks also to Steve DeWeerth 
and John Harris. 
References 
Marr, D. and Hildreth, E.C. (1980) Theory of edge detection. Proc. Roy. Soc. 
Lond. B 207:187-217. 
Mead, C.A. (1989) Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Addison-Wesley: Reading, 
MA. 
