Optimizing Correlation Algorithms for 
Hardware-based Transient Classification 
R. Timothy Edwards , Gert Cauwenberghs , and Fernando J. Pineda 2 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 
2Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD 20723 
e-mail: {tim, gert, fernando}Obach. ece. jhu. edu 
Abstract 
The performance of dedicated VLSI neural processing hardware depends 
critically on the design of the implemented algorithms. We have pre- 
viously proposed an algorithm for acoustic transient classification [1]. 
Having implemented and demonstrated this algorithm in a mixed-mode 
architecture, we now investigate variants on the algorithm, using time 
and frequency channel differencing, input and output normalization, and 
schemes to binarize and train the template values, with the goal of achiev- 
ing optimal classification performance for the chosen hardware. 
1 Introduction 
At the NIPS conference in 1996 [ 1], we introduced an algorithm for classifying acoustic 
transient signals using template correlation. While many pattern classification systems use 
template correlation [2], our system differs in directly addressing the issue of efficient im- 
plementation in analog hardware, to overcome the area and power consumption drawbacks 
of equivalent digital systems. In the intervening two years, we have developed analog cir- 
cuits and built VLSI hardware implementing both the template correlation and the frontend 
acoustic processing necessary to map the transient signal into a time-frequency representa- 
tion corresponding to the template [3, 4]. In the course of hardware development, we have 
been led to reevaluate the algorithm in the light of the possibilities and the limitations of 
the chosen hardware. 
The general architecture is depicted in Figure 1 (a), and excellent agreement between simu- 
lations and experimental output from a prototype is illustrated in Figure 1 (b). Issues of im- 
plementation efficiency and circuit technology aside, the this paper specifically addresses 
further improvements in classification performance achievable by algorithmic modifica- 
tions, tailored to the constraints and strengths of the implementation medium. 
Optimizing Correlation Algorithms for Transient Classification 679 
y[t,m] x[t,m] 
M Template 
Correlator Nx M 
pt[n, m] 
1 
I Shift and Accumulate 
7O 
6O 
50! 
40 
30 
20 
10 
O' 
-10 
-20 
Simulated 
Measured 
x .x x  
x 
40 60 80 1 O0 120 140 
cz[t] Time 
(a) (b) 
Figure 1: (a) System architecture of the acoustic transient classifier (b) Demonstration of 
accurate computation in the analog correlator on a transient classification task. 
2 The transient classification algorithm 
The core of our architecture performs the running correlation between an acoustic input 
and a set of templates for distiguishing between Z distinct classes. A simple template 
correlation equation for the acoustic transient classification can be written: 
M N 
= 
m=l n=l 
where M is the number of frequency channels of the input, N is the maximum number of 
time bins in the window, and x is the array of input signals representing the energy content 
in each of the M bandpass frequency channels. The inputs x are normalized across chan- 
nels using an L-1 normalization so that the correlation is less affected by volume changes 
in the input. The matrix Pz contains the template pattern values for pattern z out of a total 
of Z classes; Kz is a constant gain coefficient for class z, and t is the current time. This 
formula produces a running correlation cz [t] of the input array with the template for class 
z. A signal is classified as belonging to class z when the output cz exceeds the output for 
all other classes at a point in time t determined by simple segmentation of the input. 
To train and evaluate the system, we used a database of 22 recorded samples of 10 different 
classes of everyday transients such as the sounds made by aluminum cans, plastic tubs, 
handclaps, and the like. 
Each example transient recording was processed through a thirty-two channel constant-Q 
analog cochlear filter with output taps spaced on a logarithmic frequency scale [6]. For 
the simulations, the frontend system outputs were sampled and saved to disk, then digitally 
rectified and smoothed with a lowpass filter function with a 2 ms time constant. These 
thirty-two channel outputs representing short-term average energy in each frequency band 
were decimated to 500 Hz and normalized with the function 
M+I 
x[t,m] = y[t,m]/ Z y[t,k], (2) 
k----1 
where y[t, M + 1] is a constant-valued input added to the system in order to supress noise 
in the normalized outputs during periods of silence. The additional output x[t, M + 1] 
680 R. T. Edwards, G. Cauwenberghs and F. J. Pineda 
becomes maximum during the periods of silence and minimum during presentation of a 
transient event. This extra output can be used to detect onsets of transients, but is not used 
in the correlation computation of equation (1). 
Template values pz are learned by automatically aligning all examples of the same class in 
the training set using a threshold on the normalization output a:[t, M + 1], and averaging 
the values together over N samples, starting a few samples before the point of alignment. 
Class outputs are normalized relative to one another by multiplying each output by a gain 
factor Kz, computed from the template values using the L-2 norm function 
Kz= EEpz[n,m]2. (3) 
m=l n=l 
We evaluated the accuracy of the system with a cross-validation loop in which we train the 
system on all of the database except one example of one class, then test on that remaining 
example, repeating the test for each of the 220 examples in the database. The baseline 
algorithm gives a classification accuracy of 96.4%. 
3 Single-bit template values 
A major consideration for hardware implementations (both digital and analog) is the mem- 
ory storage required by the templates, one of which is required for each class. Minimal 
storage space in terms of bits per template is practical only if the algorithm can be proved 
to perform acceptably well under decreased levels of quantization of the template values. 
At one bit per template location (i.e., M x N bits per template), the complexity of the hard- 
ware is greatly simplified, but it is no longer obvious what method is best to use for learn- 
ing the template values, or for calculating the per-class gains. The choice of the method is 
guided by knowledge about the acoustic transients themselves, and simulation to evaluate 
its effect on the accuracy of a typical classification task. 
4 Simulations of different zero-mean representations 
One bit per template value is a desirable goal, but realizing this goal requires reevaluating 
the original correlation equation. The input values to be correlated represent band-limited 
energy spectra, and range from zero to some maximum determined by the L-1 normaliza- 
tion. To determine the value of a template bit, the averaged value over all examples of the 
class in the training set must be compared to a threshold (which itself must be determined), 
or else the input itself must be transformed into a form with zero average mean value. In 
the latter method, the template value is determined by the sign of the transformed input, 
averaged over all examples of the class in the training set. 
The obvious transformations of the input which provide a vector of zero-mean signals to the 
correlator are the time derivative of each input channel, and the difference between neigh- 
boring channels. Certain variations of these are possible, such as a center-surround compu- 
tation of channel differences, and zero-mean combinations of time and channel differences. 
While there is evidence that center-surround mechanisms are common to neurobiological 
signal processing of various sensory modalities in the brain, including processing in the 
mammalian auditory cortex [5], time derivatives of the input are also plausible in light of 
the short time base of acoustic transient events. Indeed, there is no reason to assume a 
priori that channel differences are even meaningful on the time scale of transients. 
Table 1 shows simulation results, where classification accuracy on the cross-validation test 
is given for different combinations of continuous-valued and binary inputs and templates, 
Optimizing Correlation Algorithms for Transient Classification 681 
Table 1: Simulation results with different architectures. 
Method Both Binary Both Binary (1,-1) Binary (1,0) 
Cont. Input Binary Template Template 
One-to-One 96.40% -- -- -- 
Time Difference 85.59% 65.32% 59.46% 82.43% 81.98% 
Channel Difference 90.54% 53.60% 95.05% 94.59% 94.14% 
Center-Surround 92.79% 53.60% 95.05% 92.34% 92.34% 
and different zero-mean transformations of the input. There are several significant points 
to the results of these classification tasks. The first is to note that in spite of the fact that 
acoustic transient events are short-term and the time steps between the bins in the template 
as low as 2 ms, using time differences between samples does not yield reliable classification 
when either the input or the template or both is reduced to binary form. However, reliability 
remains high when the correlation is performed using channel differences. The implication 
is that even the shortest transient events have stable and reliable structure in the frequency 
domain, a somewhat surprising conclusion given the impulsive nature of most transients. 
Another interesting point is that we observe no significant difference between the use of 
pairwise channel differences and the more complicated center-surround mechanism (twice 
the channel value minus the value of the two neighboring channels). The slight decrease in 
accuracy for the center-surround in some instances is most likely due only to the fact that 
one less channel contributes i
