Unsmearing Visual Motion: 
Development of Long-Range 
Horizontal Intrinsic Connections 
Kevin E. Martin Jonathan A. Marshall 
Department of Computer Science, CB 3175, Sitterson Hall 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, U.S.A. 
Abstract 
Human vision systems integrate information nonlocally, across long 
spatial ranges. For example, a moving stimulus appears smeared 
when viewed briefly (30 ms), yet sharp when viewed for a longer 
exposure (100 ms) (Burr, 1980). This suggests that visual systems 
combine information along a trajectory that matches the motion of 
the stimulus. Our self-organizing neural network model shows how 
developmental exposure to moving stimuli can direct the formation of 
horizontal trajectory-specific motion integration pathways that unsmear 
representations of moving stimuli. These results account for Burr's data 
and can potentially also model other phenomena, such as visual inertia. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Nonlocal interactions strongly influence the processing of visual motion information 
and the response characteristics of visual neurons. Examples include: attentional 
modulation of receptive field shape; modulation of neural response by stimuli beyond 
the classical receptive field; and neural response to large-field background motion. 
In this paper we present a model of the development of nonlocal neural mechanisms 
for visual motion processing. Our model (Marshall, 1990a, 1991) is based on the 
long-range excitatory horizontal intrinsic connections (LEHICs) that have been 
identified in the visual cortex of a variety of animal species (Blasdel, Lund,& 
Fitzpatrick, 1985; Callaway & Katz, 1990; Gabbott, Martin, & Whitteridge, 1987; 
Gilbert & Wiesel, 1989; Luhmann, Martinez Milln, & Singer, 1986; Lund, 1987; 
Michalski, Getsrein, Czarkowska, & Tarnecki, 1983; Mitchison & Crick, 1982; 
Nelson & Frost, 1985; Rockland &Lund, 1982, 1983; Rockland, Lund,& 
Humphrey, 1982; Ts'o, Gilbert, & Wiesel, 1986). 
2 VISUAL UNSMEARING 
Human visual systems summate signals over a period of approximately 120 ms 
in daylight (Burr 1980; Ross & Hogben, 1974). This slow summation reinforces 
417 
418 Martin and Marshall 
stationary stimuli but would tend to smear any moving object. Nevertheless, human 
observers report perceiving both stationary and moving stimuli as sharp (Anderson, 
Van Essen, & Gallant, 1990; Burr, 1980; Burr, Ross, & Morrone, 1986; Morgan & 
Benton, 1989; Welch & McKee, 1985). Why do moving objects not appear smeared? 
Burr (1980) measured perceived smear of moving spots as a function of exposure 
time. He found that a moving visual spot appears smeared (with a comet-like tail) 
when it is viewed for a brief exposure (30 ms) yet perfectly sharp when viewed 
for a longer exposure (100 ms) (Figure 1). The ability to counteract smear at 
longer exposures suggests that human visual systems combine (or integrate) and 
sharpen motion information from multiple locations along a specific spatiotemporal 
trajectory that matches the motion of the stimulus (Barlow, 1979, 1981; Burr, 1980; 
Burr & Ross, 1986) in the domains of direction, velocity, position, and time. 
This unsmearing phenomenon also suggests the existence of a memory-like effect, 
or persistence, which would cause the behavior of processing mechanisms to differ 
in the early, smeared stages of a spot's motion and in the later, unsmeared stages. 
3 NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
We built a biologically-modeled self-organizing neural network (SONN) containing 
long-range excitatory horizontal intrinsic connections (LEHICs) that learns to 
integrate visual motion information nonlocally. The network laterally propagates 
predictive moving stimulus information in a trajectory-specific manner to successive 
image locations where a stimulus is likely to appear. The network uses this 
propagated information sharpen its representation of visual motion. 
3.1 LONG-RANGE EXCITATORY HORIZONTAL INTRINSIC 
CONNECTIONS 
The network's LEHICs modeled several characteristics consistent with neurophysi- 
ological data: 
They are highly specific and anisotropic (Callaway & Katz, 1990). 
Motion 
0 ms 
30 ms 
100 ms 
Figure 1' Motion unsmearing. A spot presented for 30 ms appears to have a coxnet-like 
tail, but a spot presented for 100 ms appears sharp and unsmeared (Burr, 1980). 
Unsmearing Visual Motion: Development of Long-Range Horizontal Intrinsic Connections 419 
* They typically run between neurons with similar stimulus preferences 
(Callaway & Katz, 1990). 
. They can run for very long distances across the network space (e.g., 10 mm 
horizontally across cortex) (Luhmann, Martinez Milltn, & Singer, 1986). 
. They can be shaped adaptively through visual experience (Callaway & 
Katz, 1990; Luhmann, Martinez Millf. n, & Singer, 1986). 
. They may serve to predictively prime motion-sensitive neurons (Gabbott, 
Martin, & Whitteridge, 1987). 
Some characteristics of our modeled LEHICs are also consistent with those of 
the horizontal connections described by Hirsch & Gilbert (1991). For instance, 
we predicted (Marshall, 1990a) that horizontal excitatory input alone should not 
cause suprathreshold activation, but horizontal excitatory input should amplify 
activation when local bottom-up excitation is present. Hirsch & Gilbert (1991) 
directly observed these characteristics in area 17 pyramidal neurons in the cat. 
Since LEHICs are found in early vision processing areas like V1, we hypothesize 
that similar connections are likely to be found within higher cortical areas as 
well, like areas MT and STS. Our simulated networks may correspond to structures 
in such higher areas. Although our long-range lateral signals are modeled as 
being excitatory (Orban, Gulygs, & Vogels, 1987), they are also functionally 
homologous to long-range trajectory-specific lateral inhibition of neurons tuned to 
null-direction motion (Ga.nz & Felder, 1984; Marlin, Douglas, & Cynader, 1991; 
Motter, Steinmetz, Duffy, & Mountcastle, 1987). 
LEHICs constitute one possible means by which nonlocal communication can take 
place in visual cortex. Other means, such as large bottoln-up receptive fields, can 
also cause information to be transmitted nonlocally. However, the main difference 
between LEHICs and bottom-up receptive fields is that LEHICs provide lateral 
feedback information about the outcome of other processing within a given stage. 
This generates a form of memory, or persistence. Purely bottom-up networks 
(without LEHICs or other feedback) would perform processing afresh at each 
step, so that the outcome of processing would be influenced only by the direct, 
feedforward inputs at each step. 
3.2 RESULTS OF NETWORK DEVELOPMENT 
In our model, developmental exposure to moving stimuli guides the formation 
of motion-integration pathways that unsmear representations of moving stimuli. 
Our model network is repeatedly exposed to training input sequences of sneared 
motion patterns through bottom-up excitatory connections. Smear is modeled as an 
exponential decay and represents the responses of temporally integrating neurons 
to moving visual stimuli. The network contains a set of initially nonspecific LEHICs 
with fixed signal transmission latencies. The moving sthnuli cause the pattern of 
weights across the LEHICs to become refined, eventually forming chains that 
correspond to trajectories in the visual enviromnent. 
To model unsmearing fully, we would need a 2-D retinotopically organized layer 
of neurons tuned to different directions of motion and different velocities. Each 
trajectory in visual space would be represented by a set of like velocity and direction 
sensitive neurons whose receptive fields are located along the trajectory. These 
neurons would be connected through a trajectory-specific chain of time-delayed 
LEHICs. Lateral inhibition between chains would be organized selectively to allow 
representations of multiple stimuli to be simultaneously active (Marshall, 1990a), 
thereby letting most trajectory representations operate independently. 
Our simulation consists of a 1-D subnetwork of the fifil 2-D network, with 32 
neurons sensitive to a single velocity and direction of motion (Figure 2a). The 
420 Martin and Marshall 
lateral inhibitory connections are fixed in a Gaussian distribution, but the LEHIC 
weights can change according to a modified Hebbian rule (Grossberg, 1982): 
d + 
where z represents the weight of the LEHIC from the jth neuron to the 
ith neuron, i represents the value of the activation level of the ith neuron, e is 
a slow learning rate, h(:rj) = max(O, zj)2 is a faster-than-linear signal function, and 
f(:ri) = max(O, xi)2 is a faster-than-linear sampling function. To model multiple- 
step trajectories, we used LEHICs with three different signal transmission delays. 
Initially the LEHICs were all represented, but their weights were zero. 
As stimuli move across the receptive fields of the neurons in the network, many 
neurons are coactive because the network is unable to resolve the smear. By the 
learning rule, the weights of the LEHICs between these coactive neurons increase. 
This leads to a profusion of connection weights (Figure 2b), analogous to the crude 
clusters proposed by Callaway and Katz (1990) to describe the early (postnatal 
days 14-35) structure of horizontal connections in cat area V1. 
After sufficient exposure to moving stimuli, the crude clusters in our simulation 
become sharper (Figure 2c) because of the faster-than-linear signal functions. This 
refinement of the pattern of connection weights into chains might correspond to the 
later (postnatal day 42+) development of refined clusters described by Callaway 
and Katz (1990). 
3.3 RESULTS OF NETWORK OPERATION 
Before learning begins the network is incapable of unsmearing a stimulus moving 
across the receptive fields of the neurons (Figure 3a). As the stimulus moves from 
one position to the next, the pattern of neuron activat
