Oscillation Onset 
in 
Neural Delayed Feedback 
Andr Longtin 
Complex Systems Group and Center for Nonlinear Studies 
Theoretical Division B213, Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Los Alamos, NM 87545 
Abstract 
This paper studies dynamical aspects of neural systems with delayed neg- 
ative feedback modelled by nonlinear delay-differential equations. These 
systems undergo a Hopf bifurcation from a stable fixed point to a sta- 
ble limit cycle oscillation as certain parameters are varied. It is shown 
that their frequency of oscillation is robust to parameter variations and 
noisy fluctuations, a property that makes these systems good candidates 
for pacemakers. The onset of oscillation is postponed by both additive 
and parametric noise in the sense that the state variable spends more time 
near the fixed point than it would in the absence of noise. This is also the 
case when noise affects the delayed variable, i.e. when the system has a 
faulty memory. Finally, it is shown that a distribution of delays (rather 
than a fixed delay) also stabilizes the fixed point solution. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we study the dynamics of a class of neural delayed feedback models 
which have been used to understand equilibrium and oscillatory behavior in recur- 
rent inhibitory circuits (Mackey and an der Heiden, 1984; Plant, 1981; Milton et 
al., 1990) and brainstem reflexes such as the pupil light reflex (Longtin and Milton, 
1989a,b; Milton et al., 1989; Longtin et al., 1990; Longtin, 1991) and respiratory 
control (Glass and Mackey, 1979). These models are framed in terms of first-order 
nonlinear delay-differential equations (DDE's) in which the state variable may rep- 
resent, e.g., a membrane potential, a mean firing rate of a population of neurons or 
130 
Oscillation Onset in Neural Delayed Feedback 131 
a muscle activity. For example, the negative feedback dynamics of the human pupil 
light reflex have been shown to be appropriately modelled by the following equa- 
tion for pupil area (related to the activity of the iris muscles through the nonlinear 
monotonically decreasing function g(A) ) (see Longtin and Milton, 1989a,b): 
dg(A) dA(t) 
dA dt 
-- + ag(A) = 7 In 
z(t - - 
(1) 
I(t) is the external light intensity and  is the retinal light flux below which no 
pupillary response occurs. The left hand side of Eq.(1) governs the response of the 
system to the state-dependent forcing (i.e. stimulation) embodied in the term on 
the right-hand side. The delay r is essential to the understanding of the dynamics 
of this reflex. It accounts for the fact that the iris muscles move in response to the 
retinal light flux variations occurring ~ 300 msec earlier. 
2 FOCUS AND MOTIVATION 
For the sake of discussion, we shall focus on the following prototypical model of 
delayed negative feedback 
dx(t) 
d'-'5- + x(t) = x(t- (2) 
where fi is a vector of parameters and f is a monotonically decreasing function. 
This equation typically exhibits a Hopf bifurcation (i.e. a qualitative change in 
dynamics from a stable equilibrium solution to a stable limit cycle oscillation) as 
the slope of the feedback function or the delay are increased passed critical values. 
Autonomous (as opposed to externally forced) oscillations are frequently observed 
in real neural delayed feedback systems which suggests that these systems may 
exhibit a Hopf bifurcation. Further, it is clear that these systems operate despite 
noisy environmental fluctuations. A clear understanding of the properties of these 
systems can reveal useful information about their structure and the origin of the 
noisy sources, as well as enable us to extract general functioning principles for 
systems organized according to this scheme. 
We now focus our attention on three different dynamical aspects of these systems: 
1) the stability of the oscillation frequency and amplitude to parameter variations 
and to noise; 2) the postponement of oscillation onset due to noise; and 3) the 
stabilization of the equilibrium behavior in the more realistic case involving a dis- 
tribution of delays rather than a single fixed delay. 
3 FREQUENCY AND AMPLITUDE 
Under certain conditions, the neural delayed feedback system will settle onto equi- 
librium behavior after an initial transient. Mathematically, this corresponds to the 
fixed point solution * of Eq.(2) obtained by setting  = 0. A supercritical Hopf 
bifurcation occurs in Eq.(2) when the slope of the feedback function at this fixed 
point aaddl exceeds some value ko called the bifurcation value. It can also occur 
132 Longtin 
when the delay exceeds a critical value. The case where the parameter a increases 
is particularly interesting because the system can undergo a Hopf bifurcation at 
a = a followed by a restabilization of the fixed point through a reverse Hopf 
bifurcation at  = a2 > a (see also Mackey, 1979). 
Numerical simulations of Eq.(2) around the Hopf bifurcation point ko reveal that 
the frequency is relatively constant while the amplitude Ampi grows as x/- ko. 
However, in oscillatory time series from real neural delayed feedback systems, the 
frequency and amplitude fluctuate near the bifurcation point, with relative ampli- 
tude fluctuations being generally larger than relative frequency fluctuations. This 
point has been illustrated using data from the human pupil light reflex whose feed- 
back gain is under experimental control (see Longtin, 1991; Longtin et al., 1990). 
In the case of the pupil light reflex, the variations in the mean and standard devia- 
tion of amplitude and period accompanying increases in the bifurcation parameter 
(the external gain) have been explained in the hypothesis that neural noise is 
affecting the deterministic dynamics of the system. This noise is strongly amplified 
near the bifurcation point where the solutions are only weakly stable (Longtin et 
al., 1990). Thus the coupling of the noise to the system is most likely responsible 
for the aperiodicity of the observed data. 
The fact that the frequency is not significantly affected by the noise nor by variation 
of the bifurcation parameter (especially in comparison to the amplitude fluctua- 
tions) suggests that neural delayed feedback circuits may be ideally suited to serve 
as pacemakers. The frequency stability in regulatory biological systems has previ- 
ously been emphasized by Rapp (1981) in the context of biochemical regulation. 
4 STABILIZATION BY NOISE 
In the presence of noise, oscillations can be seen in the solution of Eq.(2) even 
when the bifurcation value is below that at which the deterministic bifurcation 
occurs. This does not mean however that the bifurcation has occurred, since these 
oscillations simply become more and more prominent as the bifurcation parameter is 
increased, and no qualitative change in the solution can be seen. Such a qualitative 
change does occur when the solution is viewed from a different standpoint. One 
can in fact construct a histogram of the values taken on by the solution of the 
model differential equation (or by the data: see Longtin, 1991). The value of this 
(normalized) histogram at a given point in the state space (e.g. of pupil area values) 
provides a measure of the fraction of the time spent by the system in the vicinity 
of this point. The onset of oscillation can then be detected by a qualitative change 
in this histogram, specifically when it goes from unimodal to bimodal (Longtin et 
al., 1990). The distance between the two humps in the bimodal case is a measure 
of the limit cycle amplitude. For short time series however (as is often the case in 
neurophysiology), it is practically impossible to resolve this distance and thus to 
ascertain whether a Hopf bifurcation has occurred. 
Intensive simulations of Eq.(2) with either additive noise (i.e. added to Eq.(2)) or 
parametric noise (e.g. on the magnitude of the feedback function) reveal that the 
statistical limit cycle amplitude (the distance between the two humps or order 
parameter) is smaller than the amplitude in the absence of noise (Longtin et al., 
1990). The bifurcation diagram is similar to that in Figure 1. This implies that the 
Oscillation Onset in Neural Delayed Feedback 133 
solution spends more time near the fixed point, i.e. that the fixed point is stabilized 
by the noise (i.e. in the absence of noise, the limit cycle is larger and the system 
spends less time near the unstable fixed point). In other words, the onset of the 
Hopf bifurcation is postponed in the presence of these types of noise. Hence the 
noise level in a neural system, whatever its source, may in fact control the onset of 
an oscillation. 
a-- 1.$ 
a=0 
I I I I I I I I 
2.5 5 ?.5 o 2.5 5 ,.s ; 
Figure 1. Magnitude of the Order Parameter as a Function of the Bifurcation 
Parameter n for Noise on the Delayed State of the System. 
In Figure 1 it is shown that the Hopf bifurcation is also postponed (the bifurcation 
curve is shifted to higher parameter values with respect to the deterministic curve) 
when the noise is applied to the delayed state variable x(t - r) and f in Eq.(2) is 
of the form (negative feedback): 
0 (3) 
f = 0 + :(t- 
For parameter values a = 3.21, A = 200, 0 = 50, r = 0.3, the deterministic Hopf 
bifurcation occurs at n = 8.18. Colored (Ornstein-Uhlenbeck type) Gaussian noise 
of standard deviation a = 1.5 and correlation time lsec was added to the variable 
x(t - r). This numerical calculation can be interpreted as a simulation of the 
behavior of a neural delayed feedback system with bad memory (i.e. in which there 
is a small error on the value recalled from the past). Thus, faulty memory also 
stabilizes the fixed point. 
5 DISTRIBUTED DELAYS 
The use of a single fixed delay in models of delayed feedback is often a good approx- 
imation and strongly warranted in a simple circuit comprising only a small number 
134 Longtin 
of cells. However, neural systems often have a spatial exten
