Synchronized Auditory and Cognitive 40 Hz 
Attentional Streams, and the Impact of 
Rhythmic Expectation on Auditory Scene Analysis 
Bill Baird 
Dept Mathematics, U.C.Berkeley, Berkeley, Ca. 94720. 
baird@ math.berkeley. edu 
Abstract 
We have developed a neural network architecture that implements a the- 
ory of attention, learning, and trans-cortical communication based on 
adaptive synchronization of 5-15 Hz and 30-80 Hz oscillations between 
cortical areas. Here we present a specific higher order cortical model of 
attentional networks, rhythmic expectancy, and the interaction of h!lgher- 
order and primar,y, cortical levels of processing. It accounts for the mis- 
match negativity ' of the auditory ERP and the results of psychological 
experiments of Jones showing that auditory stream segregation depends 
on the rhythmic structure of inputs. The timing mechanisms of the model 
allow us to explain how relative timing information such as the relative 
order of events between streams is lost when streams are formed. The 
model suggests how the theories of auditory perception and attention of 
Jones andBregman may be reconciled. 
1 Introduction 
Amplitude patterns of synchronized gamma band (30 to 80 Hz) oscillation have been ob- 
served in the ensemble activity (local field potentials) of vertebrate olfactory, visual, audi- 
tory, motor, and somatosensory cortex, and in the retina, thalamus, hippocampus, reticular 
formation, and EMG. Such activity has not only been found in primates, cats, rabbits and 
rats, but also insects, slugs, fish, amphibians, reptiles, and birds. This suggests that gamma 
oscillation may be as fundamental to neural processing at the network level as action poten- 
tials are at the cellular level. 
We have shown how oscillatory associative memories may be coupled to recognize and 
generate sequential behavior, and how a set of novel mechanisms utilizing these complex 
dynamics can be configured to solve attentional and perceptual processing problems. For 
pointers to full treatment with mathematics and complete references see [Bmrd et al., 1994]. 
An important element of intra-cortical communication in the brain, an.d between modules 
in this architecture, is the ability of a module to detect and respond to the proper input sig- 
nal from a particular module, when inputs from other modules which are irrelevant to the 
present computation are contributing crosstalk noise. We have dem,onstrated,,that selective 
control of synchronization, which we hypothesize to be a model of' attention , can be used 
to solve this coding problem and control program flow in an architecture with dynamic at- 
tractors [Baird et al., 1994]. 
Using dynamical systems theory, the architecture is constructed from recurrently intercon- 
nected oscillatory associative memory modules that model higher order sensory and motor 
areas of cortex. The modules learn connection weights between themselves which cause the 
system to evolve under a 5-20 Hz clocked sensory-motor processing cycle by a sequence 
4 B. Baird 
of transitions of synchroniz 30-80 Hz .,oscillatory attractors within the modules. The ar- 
chitecture employ. s selective' attentional' control of the synchronization of the 30-80 Hz 
gamma band oscdlations between modules to direct the flow of computation to recognize 
and generate sequences. The 30-80 Hz attractor amplitude patterns code the information 
content of a comcal area, whereas phase and frequency are used to softwire the network, 
since only the synchronized areas communicate by exchanging amplitude information. The 
system works like a broadcast network where the unavoidable crosstalk to all areas from pre- 
vious learned connections is overcome by frequency coding to allow the moment to moment 
operation of attentional communication only between selected task-relevant areas. 
The behavior of the time traces in different modules of the architecture models the tem- 
eetrary appearance and switching of the synchronization of 5-20 and 30-80 Hz oscillations 
ween cortical areas that is observed during sensorimotor tasks in monkeys and numans. 
The architecture models the 5-20 Hz evoked potentials seen in the EEG as the control sig- 
nals which determine the sensory-motor processing cycle. The 5-20 Hz clocks which drive 
these control signals in the architecture model thalamic pacemakers which are thought to 
control the excitability of neocortical tissue through similar nonspecific biasing cm2-,, ents that 
cause the cognitive and sensory evoked potentials of the EEG. The 5-20 Hz cycles 'quantize 
time and form the basis of ddrived somato-motor rhythms withperiods up to seconds that 
entrain to each other in motor coordination and to external rhythms in speech perception 
[Jones et al., 1981]. 
1.1 Attentional Streams of Synchronized 40 Hz Activity 
There is extensive evidence for the claim of the model that the 30-80 Hz gamma band ac- 
tivity in the brain accomplishes attentional processing, since 40 Hz appears in cortex when 
and where attention is required. For example, it is found in somatosensory, motor and pre- 
motor cortex of monkeys when they must pick a rasin out of a small box, but not when a 
habitual lever press delivers the reward. In human attention experiments, 30-80 Hz activity 
goes up in the contralateral auditory areas when subjects are instructed to pay attention to 
one ear and not the other. Gamma activity declines in the dominant hemisphere along with 
errors in a learnable target and distractors task, but not when the distractors and target vary 
at random on each trial. Anesthesiologists use the absence of 40 Hz activity as a reliable 
indicator of unconsciousness. Recent work has shown that cats with convergent and diver- 
gent strabismus who fail on tasks where perceptual binding is required also do not exhibit 
cortical synchrony. This is evidence that gamma synchronization s perceptually functional 
and not epiphenomenal. 
The ,,chitecture illustrates the notion that synchronization of gamma band activity not 
only binds the features of inputs in primary sensory cortex into objects, but further binds 
the activity of an attended object to oscillatory activity in associational and higher-order 
sensory and motor cortical areas to create an evolving attentional network of intercommu- 
nicating cortical areas that directs behavior. The binding of sequences of attractor transitions 
between modules of the architecture by synchronization of their activity models the physio- 
logical mechanism for the formation of perceptual and cognitive streams investigated by 
Bregman [Bregman, 1990], Jones [Jones et al., 1981], and others. In audition, according to 
Bregman's work, successive events of a sound source are bound together into a distinct se- 
quence or stream and segregated from other sequences so that one pays attention to only 
one sound source at a time (the cocktail party problem). Higher order cortical or cognitive 
streams are in evidence when subjects are unable to recall the relative order of the telling of 
events between two stories told in alternating segments. 
MEG tomographic observations show large scale rostral to caudal motor-sensory sweeps of 
coherent thalamo-cortical 40Hz activity accross the entire brain, the phase of which is reset 
by sensory input in w ,,a_ng, but not in dr_,,ea._ states ILlinas and Ribary, 1993]. This suggests 
an inner higher order attentional stream' is constantly cycling between motor (ro, stral)an.,d, 
s_ensory (caudal) areas in the absence of input,: It may be !nterrupted by input 'pop out 
from primary_ areas or it may reach down as a searchlight' to synchromze with particular 
ensembles of primary activity to be attended. 
2 Jones Theory of Dynamic Attention 
Jones [Jones et al., 1981] has developed a psychological theory of attention, perception, and 
motor timing based on the hypothesxs that these processes are organized by neural rhythms 
in the range of 10 to .5 Hz - the range within which subjects perceive periodic events as a 
rhythm. These rhyt. hms provide a multiscale representation of.time and selective!y synchro- 
nize with the promnant periodicities of an in. put to provide a temporal expectanon mecha- 
nism for attention to target particular points in time. 
40 Hz Attentional Streams, Rhythmic Expectation, and Auditory Scene Analysis 5 
For example, some work suggests that the accented parts of speech create a rhythm to which 
listeners entrain. Attention can then be focused on these expected locations as recognition 
anchor points for inference of less prominant parts of the speech stream. This is the temporal 
analog of the body centered spatial coordinate frame and multiscale covert attention window 
system in vision. Here the body centered temporal coordinates of the internal time base 
orient by entrainment to the external rhythm, and the window of covert temporal attention 
can then select a level of the multiscale temporal coordinates. 
In this view, just as two cortical areas must synchronize to communicate, so must two ner- 
vous system,s,. Work using frame by fq,,an? film analysis of human verbal interaction, shows 
evidence of interactional synchrony of gesture and body movement changes and EE,,G of 
both sp, _e__,e,r and listener wth the onsets of phonemes in speech at the level of a 10 Hz' mi- 
crorhythm ' - the base clock rate of our models. Normal infants synchronize their spon- 
taneous body tailings at this 10 Hz level to the mothers voice accents, while autistic and 
s.chitzophrenic children fail to show interactional synchrony. Autistics are unable to tap in 
ttme to a metronome. 
Neural expectation rhythms that support Jones' theory have been found in the auditory EEG. 
In experiments where the arrival time of a target stimulus is regular enough to be learned by 
an experimental subject, it has been shown that the 10 Hz activity in advance of the stimulus 
becomes ph
