Neural System Model of Human Sound 
Localization 
Craig T. Jin 
Department of Physiology and 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Simon Carlfie 
Department of Physiology 
and Institute of Biomedical Research, 
Univ. of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia 
Abstract 
This paper examines the role of biological constraints in the human audi- 
tory localization process. A psychophysical and neural system modeling 
approach was undertaken in which performance comparisons between 
competing models and a human subject explore the relevant biologi- 
cally plausible realism constraints. The directional acoustical cues, 
upon which sound localization is based, were derived from the human 
subject's head-related transfer functions (HRTFs). Sound stimuli were 
generated by convolving bandpass noise with the HRTFs and were pre- 
sented to both the subject and the model. The input stimuli to the model 
was processed using the Auditory Image Model of cochlear processing. 
The cochlear data was then analyzed by a time-delay neural network 
which integrated temporal and spectral information to determine the spa- 
tial location of the sound source. The combined cochlear model and 
neural network provided a system model of the sound localization pro- 
cess. Human-like localization performance was qualitatively achieved 
for broadband and bandpass stimuli when the model architecture incor- 
porated frequency division (or tonotopicity), and was trained using vari- 
able bandwidth and center-frequency sounds. 
1 Introduction 
The ability to accurately estimate the location of a sound source has obvious evolutionary 
advantages in terms of avoiding predators and finding prey. Indeed, humans are very accu- 
rate in their ability to localize broadband sounds. There has been a considerable amount of 
psychoacoustical research into the auditory processes involved in human sound localization 
(recent review [ 1 ]). Furthermore, numerous models of the human and animal sound local- 
ization process have been proposed (recent reviews [2, 3]). However, there still remains a 
large gap between the psychophysical and the model explanations. Principal congruence 
between the two approaches exists for localization performance under restricted conditions, 
such as for narrowband sounds where spectral integration is not required, or for restricted 
regions of space. Unfortunately, there is no existing computational model that accounts 
well for human sound localization performance for a wide-range of sounds (e.g., vary- 
ing in bandwidth and center-frequency). Furthermore, the biological consmints pertinent 
to sound localization have generally not been explored by these models. These include 
the spectral resolution of the auditory system in terms of the number and bandwidth of 
762 C. T. Jin and S. Carlile 
frequency channels and the role of tonotopic processing. In addition, the performance re- 
quirements of such a system are substantial and involve, for example, the accomodation of 
spectrally complex sounds, the robustness to irregularity in the sound source spectrum, and 
the channel based structure of spatial coding as evidenced by auditory spatial after-effects 
[4]. The crux of the matter is the notion that biologically-likely realism, if built into a 
model, provides for a better understanding of the underlying processes. 
This work attempts to bridge part of this gap between the modeling and psychophysics. It 
describes the development and use (for the first time, to the authors' knowledge) of a time- 
delay neural network model that integrates both spectral and temporal cues for auditory 
sound localization and compares the performance of such a model with the corresponding 
human psychophysical evidence. 
2 Sound Localization 
The sound localization performance of a normal hearing human subject was tested using 
stimuli consisting of three different band-passed sounds: (1) a low-passed sound (300 - 
2000 Hz) (2) a high-passed sound (2000 - 14000 Hz) and (3) a broadband sound (300 - 
14000 Hz). These frequency bands respectively cover conditions in which either temporal 
cues, spectral cues, or both dominate the localization process (see [ 1 ]). The subject per- 
formed five localization trials for each sound condition, each with 76 test locations evenly 
distributed about the subject's head. The detailed methods used in free-field sound local- 
ization can be found in [5]. A short summary is presented below. 
2.1 Sound Localization Task 
Human sound localization experiments were carried out in a darkened anechoic cham- 
ber. Free-field sound stimuli were presented from a loudspeaker carried on a semicircular 
robotic arm. These stimuli consisted of fresh white Gaussian noise appropriately band- 
passed for each trial. The robotic ann allowed for placement of the speaker at almost any 
location on the surface of an imaginary sphere, one meter in radius, centered on the sub- 
ject's head. The subject indicated the location of the sound source by pointing his nose in 
the perceived direction of the sound. The subject's head orientation was monitored using 
an electromagnetic sensor system (Polhemus, Inc.). 
2.2 Measurement and Validation of Outer Ear Acoustical Filtering 
The cues for sound localization depend not only upon the spectral and temporal proper- 
ties of the sound stimulus, but also on the acoustical properties of the individual's outer 
ears. It is generally accepted that the relevant acoustical cues (i.e., the interaural time dif- 
ference, ITD; interaural level difference, ILD; and spectral cues) to a sound's location in 
the free-field are described by the head-related transfer function (HRTF) which is typically 
represented by a finite-length impulse response (FIR) filter [1]. Sounds filtered with the 
HRTF should be localizable when played over ear-phones which bypass the acoustical fil- 
tering of the outer ear. The illusion of free-field sounds using head-phones is known as 
virtual auditory space (VAS). 
Thus in order to incorporate outer ear filtering into the modelling process, measurements 
of the subject's HRTFs were carried out in the anechoic chamber. The measurements were 
made for both ears simultaneously using a blocked ear technique [ 1 ]. 393 measurements 
were made at locations evenly distributed on the sphere. In order to establish that the 
HRTFs appropriately indicated the direction of a sound source the subject repeated the 
localization task as above with the stimulus presented in VAS. 
Neural System Model of Human Sound Localization 763 
2.3 Human Sound Localization Performance 
The sound localization performance of the human subject in three different stimulus con- 
ditions (broadband, high-pass, low-pass) was examined in both the free-field and in vir- 
tual auditory space. Comparisons between the two (using correlational statistics, data not 
shown, but see [3]) across all sound conditions demonstrated their equivalence. Thus the 
measured HRTFs were highly effective. 
Localization data across all three sound conditions (single trial VAS data shown in Fig. la) 
shows that the subject performed well in both the broadband and high-pass sound condi- 
tions and rather poorly in the low-pass condition, which is consistent with other studies [6]. 
The data is illustrated using spherical localization plots which well demonstrates the global 
distribution of localization responses. Given the large qualitative differences in the data 
sets presented below, this visual method of analysis was sufficient for evaluating the com- 
peting models. For each condition, the target and response locations are shown for both the 
left (L) and right (R) hemispheres of space. It is clear that in the low-pass condition, the 
subject demonstrated gross mislocalizations with the responses clustering toward the lower 
and frontal hemispheres. The gross mislocalizations correspond mainly to the traditional 
cone of confusion errors [6]. 
3 Localization Model 
The sound localization model consisted of two basic system components: (1) a modi- 
fied version of the physiological Auditory Image Model [7] which simulates the spectro- 
temporal characteristics of peripheral auditory processing, and (2) the computational archi- 
tecture of a time-delay neural network. The sounds presented to the model were filtered 
using the subject's HRTFs in exactly the same manner as was used in producing VAS. 
Therefore, the modeling results can be compared with human localization performance on 
an individual basis. 
The modeling process can be broken down into four stages. In the first stage a sound 
stimulus was generated with specific band-pass characteristics. The sound stimulus was 
then filtered with the subject's right and left ear HRTFs to render an auditory stimulus 
originating from a particular location in space. The auditory stimulus was then processed 
by the Auditory Image Model (AIM) to generate a neural activity profile that simulates 
the output of the inner hair cells in the organ of Corti and indicates the spiking probability 
of auditory nerve fibers. Finally, in the fourth and last stage, a time-delay neural network 
(TDNN) computed the spatial direction of the sound input based on the distribution of 
neural activity calculated by AIM. 
A detailed presentation of the modeling process can be found in [3], although a brief sum- 
mary is presented here. The distribution of cochlear filters across frequency in AIM was 
chosen such that the minimum center frequency was 300 Hz and the maximum center fre- 
quency was 14 kHz with 31 filters essentially equally spaced on a logarithmic scale. In 
order to fully describe a computational layer of the TDNN, four characteristic numbers 
must be specified: (1) the number of neurons; (2) the kernel length, a number which de- 
termines the size of the current layer's time-window in terms of the number of time-steps 
of the previous layer; (3) the 
