Perceiving without Learning: from Spirals to 
Inside/Outside Relations 
Ke Chen* and DeLiang L. Wang 
Department of Computer and Information Science and Center for Cognitive Science 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1277, USA 
{kchen,dwang} @cis.ohio-state.edu 
Abstract 
As a benchmark task, the spiral problem is well known in neural net- 
works. Unlike previous work that emphasizes learning, we approach 
the problem from a generic perspective that does not involve learning. 
We point out that the spiral problem is intrinsically connected to the in- 
side/outside problem. A generic solution to both problems is proposed 
based on oscillatory correlation using a time delay network. Our simu- 
lation results are qualitatively consistent with human performance, and 
we interpret human limitations in terms of synchrony and time delays, 
both biologically plausible. As a special case, our network without time 
delays can always distinguish these figures regardless of shape, position, 
size, and orientation. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The spiral problem refers to distinguishing between a connected single spiral and discon- 
nected double spirals, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Since Minsky and Papert (1969) first intro- 
duced the problem in their influential book on perceptrons, it'has received much attention 
and has become a benchmark task in neural networks. Many solutions have been attempted 
using different learning models since Lang and Witbrock (1988) reported that the problem 
could not be solved with a standard multilayer perceptron. However, resulting learning 
systems are only able to produce decision regions highly constrained by the spirals de- 
fined in a training set, thus specific in shape, position, size, and orientation. Moreover, 
no explanation is provided as to why the problem is difficult for human subjects to solve. 
Grossberg and Wyse (1991) proposed a biologically plausible neural network architecture 
for figure-ground separation and reported their network can distinguish between connected 
and disconnected spirals. In their paper, however, no demonstration was given to the spiral 
problem, and their model does not exhibit the limitations that humans do. 
*Also with National Laboratory of Machine Perception and Center for Information Science, 
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: chen@cis.pku.edu.cn 
Perceiving without Learning 11 
There is a related problem in the study of visual perception, i.e., the perception of in- 
side/outside relations. Considering the visual input of a single closed curve, the task of 
perceiving the inside/outside relation is to determine whether a specific pixel lies inside or 
outside the closed curve. For the human visual system, the perception of inside/outside 
relations often appears to be immediate and effortless (see an example in Fig. 2(a)). As il- 
lustrated in Fig. 2(b), however, the immediate perception is not available for humans when 
the bounding contour becomes highly convoluted (Ullman 1984). Ullman (1984) suggested 
the computation of spatial relation through the use of visual routines. Visual routines result 
in the conjecture that the inside/outside is inherently sequential. As pointed out recently by 
Ullman (1996), the processes underlying the perception of inside/outside relations are as 
yet unknown and applying visual routines is simply one alternative. 
(a) (b) (b) 
(a) 
Fig. 1: The spiral problem. (a) a connected single 
spiral. (b) disconnected double spirals (adapted 
from Minsky and Papert 1969, 1988). 
Fig. 2: Inside/Outside relations. (a) an ex- 
ample (adapted from Julesz 1995). (b) an- 
other example (adapted from Ullman 1984). 
Theoretical investigations of brain functions indicate that timing of neuronal activity is a 
key to the construction of neuronal assemblies (Milner 1974, Malsburg 1981). In partic- 
ular, the discovery of synchronous oscillations in the visual cortex (Singer & Gray 1995) 
has triggered much interest to develop computational models for oscillatory correlation. 
Recently, Terman and Wang (1995) proposed locally excitatory globally inhibitory oscilla- 
tor networks (LEGION). They theoretically showed that LEGION can rapidly achieve both 
synchronization in a locally coupled oscillator group representing each object and desyn- 
chronization among a number of oscillator groups representing different objects. More 
recently, Campbell and Wang (1998) have studied time delays in networks of relaxation 
oscillators and analyzed the behavior of LEGION with time delays. Their studies show 
that loosely synchronous solutions can be achieved under a broad range of initial condi- 
tions and time delays. Therefore, LEGION provides a computational framework to study 
the process of visual perception from a standpoint of oscillatory correlation. 
We explore both the spiral problem and the inside/outside relations by oscillatory correla- 
tion in this paper. We show that computation through LEGION with time delays yields a 
generic solution to these problems since time delays inevitably occur in information trans- 
mission of a biological system. This investigation indicates that perceptual performance 
would be limited if local activation cannot be rapidly propagated due to time delays. As a 
special case, LEGION without time delays reliably distinguishes between connected and 
disconnected spirals and discriminates the inside and the outside regardless of shape, po- 
sition, size, and orientation. Thus, we suggest that this kind of problems may be better 
solved by a neural oscillator network rather than by sophisticated learning. 
2 METHODOLOGY 
The architecture of LEGION used in this paper is a two-dimensional network. Each os- 
cillator is connected to its four nearest neighbors, and the global inhibitor (GI) receives 
excitation from each oscillator on the network and in turn inhibits each oscillator (Terman 
12 K. Chen and D. L. Wang 
& Wang 1995). In LEGION, a single oscillator, i, is defined as 
dxi _ 3xi 3 (1 a) 
dt - xi - Yi q- Ii q- Si q- p 
dyi = e(,k + fftanh(/xi) - Yi). (lb) 
dt 
Here Ii represents external stimulation to the oscillator, and $i represents overall coupling 
from other oscillators and the GI in the network. The symbol p denotes the amplitude of a 
Gaussian noise. Other parameters e, /, A, and ' are chosen to control a periodic solution 
of the dynamic system. The periodic solution alternates between the silent and the active 
phases of near steady-state behavior (Terman & Wang 1995). The coupling term $i at time 
t is 
Si = Y WikS(xk(t-- ),Ox) - WzS(z, Oz), (2) 
kJV(i) 
where $oo(x, 0) = 1/(1 + exp[-tc(x - 0)]) and the parameter tc controls the steepness of 
the sigmoid function. Wi& is a synaptic weight from oscillator k to oscillator i, and N(i) 
is the set of its immediate neighbors. r is a time delay in interactions (Campbell & Wang 
1998), and 0x is a threshold over which an oscillator can affect its neighbors. Wz is the 
positive weight used for the inhibition from the global inhibitor z, whose activity is defined 
as 
dz 
= - z). (3) 
where rr = 0 if xi < 0 for every oscillator i, and rr = 1 if xi(t) _> O for at least 
one oscillator i. Here 0 represents a threshold to determine whether the GI z sends inhibi- 
tion to oscillators, and the parameter b determines the rate at which the inhibitor reacts to 
stimulation from oscillators. 
We use pattern formation to refer to the behavior that all the oscillators representing the 
same object are synchronous, while the oscillators representing different objects are desyn- 
chronous. Terman and Wang (1995) have analytically shown that such a solution can be 
achieved in LEGION without time delays. However, a solution may not be achieved when 
time delays are introduced. Although the loose synchrony concept has been introduced to 
describe time delay behavior (Campbell & Wang 1998), it does not indicate pattern forma- 
tion in an entire network even when loose synchrony is achieved because loose synchrony 
is a local concept defined in terms of pairs of neighboring oscillators. Here we intro- 
duce a measure called min-max difference in order to examine whether pattern formation is 
achieved. Suppose that oscillators Oi and Oj represent two pixels in the same object, and 
the oscillator Ot represents a pixel in a different object. Moreover, let t 8 denote the time 
at which oscillator O8 enters the active phase. The min-max difference measure is defined 
as I - tJl < rRB and [t i - tkl _> rRB, where rRB is the time period of an active phase. 
Intuitively, this measure suggests that pattern formation is achieved if any two oscillators 
representing two pixels in the same object have some overlap in the active phase, while any 
two oscillators representing two pixels belonging to different objects never stay in the active 
phase simultaneously. This definition of pattern formation applies to both exact synchrony 
in LEGION without time delays and loose synchrony with time delays. 
3 SIMULATIONS 
For a given image consisting of N x N pixels, a two-dimensional LEGION network with 
N x N oscillators is used so that each oscillator in the network corresponds to one pixel 
in the image. In the following simulations, the equations 1-3 were numerically solved 
using the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method. We illustrate stimulated oscillators with black 
squares. All oscillators were initialized randomly. A large number of simulations have 
Perceiving without Learning 13 
been conducted with a broad range of parameter values and network sizes (Chen & Wang 
1997). Here we report typical results using a specific set of parameter values. 
3.1 THE SPIRAL PROBLEM 
For simulations, the two images in Fig. 1 were sampled as two binary images with 29 x 29 
pixels. For these images, two problems can be addressed: (1) When an image is presented, 
can one determine whether it contains a single spiral or double spirals? (2) Given a point 
on a 
