A Hippocampal Model of Recognition Memory 
Randall C. O'Reilly 
Department of Psychology 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Campus Box 345 
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 
oreillypsych.colorado.edu 
Kenneth A. Norman 
Department of Psychology 
Harvard University 
33 Kirkland Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
nonnanwjh.harvard. edu 
James L. McClelland 
Department of Psychology and 
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
jlmcnbc.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
A rich body of data exists showing that recollection of specific infor- 
mation makes an important contribution to recognition memory, which 
is distinct from the contribution of familiarity, and is not adequately cap- 
tured by existing unitary memory models. Furthermore, neuropsycholog- 
ical evidence indicates that recollection is subserved by the hippocampus. 
We present a model, based largely on known features of hippocampal 
anatomy and physiology, that accounts for the following key character- 
istics of recollection: 1) false recollection is rare (i.e., participants rarely 
claim to recollect having studied nonstudied items), and 2) increasing in- 
terference leads to less recollection but apparently does not compromise 
the quality of recollection (i.e., the extent to which recollected informa- 
tion veridically reflects events that occurred at study). 
1 Introduction 
For nearly 50 years, memory researchers have known that our ability to remember specific 
past episodes depends critically on the hippocampus. In this paper, we describe our initial 
attempt to use a mechanistically explicit model of hippocampal function to explain a wide 
range of human memory data. 
Our understanding of hippocampal function from a computational and biological perspec- 
74 R. C. O'Reilly, K. A. Norman and J. L. McClelland 
tive is based on our prior work (McClelland, McNaughton, & O'Reilly, 1995; O'Reilly & 
McClelland, 1994). At the broadest level, we think that the hippocampus exists in part to 
provide a memory system which can learn arbitrary information rapidly without suffering 
undue amounts of interference. This memory system sits on top of, and works in conjunc- 
tion with, the neocortex, which learns slowly over many experiences, producing integrative 
representations of the relevant statistical features of the environment. The hippocampus ac- 
complishes rapid, relatively interference-free learning by using relatively non-overlapping 
(pattern separated) representations. Pattern separation occurs as a result of 1) the sparse- 
ness of hippocampal representations (relative to cortical representations), and 2) the fact 
that hippocampal units are sensitive to conjunctions of cortical features -- given two cor- 
tical patterns with 50% feature overlap, the probability that a particular conjunction of 
features will be present in both patterns is much less than 50%. 
We propose that the hippocampus produces a relatively high-threshold, high-quality recol- 
lective response to test items. The response is high-threshold in the sense that studied 
items sometimes trigger rich recollection (defined as retrieval of most or all of the test 
probe's features from memory) but lures never trigger rich recollection. The response is 
high-quality in the sense that, most of the time, the recollection signal consists of part 
or all of a single studied pattern, as opposed to a blend of studied patterns. The high- 
threshold, high-quality nature of recollection can be explained in terms of the conjunc- 
tivity of hippocampal representations: Insofar as recollection is a function of whether the 
features of the test probe were encountered together at study, lures (which contain many 
novel feature conjunctions, even if their constituent features are familiar) are unlikely to 
trigger rich recollection; also, insofar as the hippocampus stores feature conjunctions (as 
opposed to individual features), features which appeared together at study are likely to 
appear together at test. Importantly, in accordance with dual-process accounts of recog- 
nition memory (Yonelinas, 1994; Jacoby, Yonelinas, & Jennings, 1996), we believe that 
hippocampally-driven recollection is not the sole contributor to recognition memory per- 
formance. Rather, extensive evidence exists that recollection is complemented by a fall- 
back familiarity signal which participants consult when rich recollection does not occur. 
The familiarity signal is mediated by as-yet unspecified areas (likely including the parahip- 
pocampal temporal cortex: Aggleton & Shaw, 1996; Miller & Desireone, 1994). 
Our account differs substantially from most other computational and mathematical models 
of recognition memory. Most of these models compute the global match between the 
test probe and stored memories (e.g., Hintzman, 1988; Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984); recollec- 
tion in these models involves computing a similarity-weighted average of stored memory 
patterns. In other memory models, recollection of an item depends critically on the extent 
to which the components of the item's representation were linked with that of the study 
context (e.g., Chappell & Humphreys, 1994). Critically, recollection in all of these models 
lacks the high-threshold, high-quality character of recollection in our model. This is most 
evident when we consider the effects of manipulations which increase interference (e.g., 
increasing the length of the study list, or increasing inter-item similarity). As interference 
increases, global matching models predict increasingly blurry recollection (reflecting the 
contribution of more items to the composite output vector), while the other models predict 
that false recollection of lures will increase. In contrast, our model predicts that increasing 
interference should lead to decreased correct recollection of studied test probes, but there 
should be no concomitant increase in erroneous types of recollection (i.e., recollection 
of details which mismatch studied test probes, or rich recollection of lures). This predic- 
tion is consistent with the recent finding that correct recollection of studied items decreases 
with increasing list length (Yonelinas, 1994). Lastly, although extant data certainly do not 
contradict the claim that the veridicality of recollection is robust to interference, we ac- 
knowledge that additional, focused experimentation is needed to definitively resolve this 
issue. 
A Hippocampal Model of Recognition Memory 75 
b) 
Figure 1: The model. a) Shows the areas and connectivity, and the corresponding columns within 
the Input, EC, and CA1 (see text). b) Shows an example activity pattern. Note the sparse activity in 
the DG and CA3, and intermediate sparseness of the CAl. 
2 Architecture and Overall Behavior 
Figure 1 shows a diagram of our model, which contains the basic anatomical regions of 
the hippocampal formation, as well as the entorhinal cortex (EC), which serves as the 
primary cortical input/output pathway for the hippocampus. The model as described below 
instantiates a series of hypotheses about the structure and function of the hippocampus and 
associated cortical areas, which are based on anatomical and physiological data and other 
models as described in O'Reilly and McClelland (1994) and McClelland et al. (1995), but 
not elaborated upon significantly here. 
The Input layer activity pattern represents the state of the EC resulting from the presentation 
of a given item. We assume that the hippocampus stores and retrieves memories by way 
of reduced representations in the EC, which have a correspondence with more elaborated 
representations in other areas of cortex that is developed via long-term conical learning. 
We further assume that there is a rough topology to the organization of EC, with different 
cortical areas and/or sub-areas represented by different slots, which can be thought of as 
representing different feature dimensions of the input (e.g., color, font, semantic features, 
etc.). Our EC has 36 slots with four units per slot; one unit per slot was active (with each 
unit representing a particular feature value). Input patterns were constructed from pro- 
totypes by randomly selecting different feature values for a random subset of slots. There 
are two functionally distinct layers of the EC, one which receives input from cortical ar- 
eas and projects into the hippocampus (superficial or ECi,), and another which receives 
projections from the CA1 and projects back out to the cortex (deep or ECoa, t). While the 
representations in these layers are probably different in their details, we assume that they 
are functionally equivalent, and use the same representations across both for convenience. 
JCin projects to three areas of the hippocampus: the dentate gyrus (DG), area CA3, and 
area CA 1. The storage of the input pattern occurs through weight changes in the feedfor- 
ward and recurrent projections into the CA3, and the CA3 to CA1 connections. The CA3 
and CA1 contain the two primary representations of the input pattern, while the DG plays 
an important but secondary role as a pattern-separation enhancer for the CA3. 
The CA3 provides the primary sparse, pattern-separated, conjunctive representation de- 
scribed above. This is achieved by random, partial connectivity between the EC and CA3, 
and a high threshold for activation (i.e., sparseness), such that the few units which are acti- 
vated in the CA3 (5% in our model) are those which have the most inputs from active EC 
units. The odds of a unit having such a high proportion of inputs from even two relatively 
similar EC patterns is low, resulting in pattern separation (see O'Reilly & McClelland, 
76 R. C. O'Reilly, K. A. Norman and J. L. McClelland 
1994 for a much more detailed and precise treatment of this issue, and the role of the DG 
in facilitating pattern separation). While these CA3 representations are useful for allowing 
rapid l
