Churn Reduction in the Wireless Industry 
Michael C. Mozer *+, Richard Wolniewicz*, David B. Grimes *+, 
Eric Johnson*, Howard Kaushansky* 
* Athene Software + Department of Computer Science 
2060 Broadway, Suite 300 University of Colorado 
BouMer, CO 80302 Boulder, CO 80309-0430 
Abstract 
Competition in the wireless telecommunications industry is rampant. To main- 
tain profitability, wireless carriers must control churn, the loss of subscribers 
who switch from one carder to another. We explore statistical techniques for 
chum prediction and, based on these predictions, an optimal policy for identify- 
ing customers to whom incentives should be offered to increase retention. Our 
experiments are based on a data base of nearly 47,000 U.S. domestic subscrib- 
ers, and includes information about their usage, billing, credit, application, and 
complaint history. We show that under a wide variety of assumptions concerning 
the cost of intervention and the retention rate resulting from intervention, chum 
prediction and remediation can yield significant savings to a carrier. We also 
show the importance of a data representation crafted by domain experts. 
Competition in the wireless telecommunications industry is rampant. As many as seven 
competing carders operate in each market. The industry is extremely dynamic, with new 
services, technologies, and carriers constantly altering the landscape. Carriers announce 
new rates and incentives weekly, hoping to entice new subscribers and to lure subscribers 
away from the competition. The extent of rivalry is reflected in the deluge of advertise- 
ments for wireless service in the daily newspaper and other mass media. 
The United States had 69 million wireless subscribers in 1998, roughly 25% of the 
population. Some markets are further developed; for example, the subscription rate in Fin- 
land is 53%. Industry forecasts are for a U.S. penetration rate of 48% by 2003. Although 
there is significant room for growth in most markets, the industry growth rate is declining 
and competition is rising. Consequently, it has become crucial for wireless carriers to con- 
trol churn--the loss of customers who switch from one carrier to another. At present, 
domestic monthly chum rates are 2-3% of the customer base. At an average cost of $400 
to acquire a subscriber, churn cost the industry nearly $6.3 billion in 1998; the total annual 
loss rose to nearly $9.6 billion when lost monthly revenue from subscriber cancellations is 
considered (Luna, 1998). It costs roughly five times as much to sign on a new subscriber 
as to retain an existing one. Consequently, for a carrier with 1.5 million subscribers, reduc- 
ing the monthly churn' rate from 2% to 1% would yield an increase in annual earnings of at 
least $54 million, and an increase in shareholder value of approximately $150 million. 
(Estimates are even higher when lost monthly revenue is considered; see Fowlkes, Madan, 
Andrew, & Jensen, 1999; Luna, 1998.) 
The goal of our research is to evaluate the benefits of predicting churn using tech- 
niques from statistical machine learning. We designed models that predict the probability 
936 M. C. Mozer, R. Wolniewicz, D. B. Grimes, E. Johnson and H. Kaushansky 
of a subscriber churning within a short time window, and we evaluated how well these pre- 
dictions could be used for decision making by estimating potential cost savings to the 
wireless carrier under a variety of assumptions concerning subscriber behavior. 
1 THE FRAMEWORK 
Figure 1 shows a framework for churn prediction and profitability maximization. 
Data from a subscriber--on which we elaborate in the next section--is fed into three com- 
ponents which estimate: the likelihood that the subscriber will churn, the profitability 
(expected monthly revenue) of the subscriber, and the subscriber's credit risk. Profitability 
and credit risk determine how valuable the subscriber is to the carrier, and hence influ- 
ences how much the carrier should be willing to spend to retain the subscriber. Based on 
the predictions of subscriber behavior, a decision making component determines an inter- 
vention strategy--whether a subscriber should be contacted, and if so, what incentives 
should be offered to appease them. We adopt a decision-theoretic approach which aims to 
maximize the expected profit to the carrier. 
In the present work, we focus on chum prediction and utilize simple measures of 
subscriber profitability and credit risk. However, current modeling efforts are directed at 
more intelligent models of profitability and credit risk. 
2 DATA SET 
The subscriber data used for our experiments was provided by a major wireless car- 
rier. The carder does not want to be identified, as churn rates are confidential. The carrier 
provided a data base of 46,744 primarily business subscribers, all of whom had multiple 
services. (Each service corresponds to a cellular telephone or to some other service, such 
as voice messaging or beeper capability.) All subscribers were from the same region of the 
United States, about 20% in major metropolitan areas and 80% more geographically dis- 
tributed. The total revenue for all subscribers in the data base was $14 million in October 
1998. The average revenue per subscriber was $234. We focused on multi-service sub- 
scribers, because they provide significantly more revenue than do typical single-service 
subscribers. 
When subscribers are on extended contracts, churn prediction is relatively easy: it 
seldom occurs during the contract period, and often occurs when the contract comes to an 
end. Consequently, all subscribers in our data base were month-to-month, requiring the 
use of more subtle features than contract termination date to anticipate churn. 
The subscriber data was extracted from the time interval October through December, 
1998. Based on these data, the task was to predict whether a subscriber would churn in 
January or February 1999. The carder provided their internal definition of churn, which 
was based on the closing of all services held by a subscriber. From this definition, 2,876 of 
the subscribers active in October through December churned--6.2% of the data base. 
subscriber__ 
'! subscriber 
churn 
prediction 
. subscriber 
profitability 
estimation 
 subscriber 
credit risk 
estimation 
decision 
making 
 intervention 
strategy 
FIGURE 1. The framework for churn prediction and profitability maximization 
Churn Reduction in the Wireless Industry 93 7 
2.1 INPUT FEATURES 
Ultimately, churn occurs because subscribers are dissatisfied with the price or quality of 
service, usually as compared to a competing carrier. The main reasons for subscriber dis- 
satisfaction vary by region and over time. Table 1 lists important factors that influence 
subscriber satisfaction, as well as the relative importance of the factors (J. D. Power and 
Associates, 1998). In the third column, we list the type of information required for deter- 
mining whether a particular factor is likely to be influencing a subscriber. We categorize 
the types of information as follows. 
Network. Call detail records (date, time, duration, and location of all calls), dropped 
calls (calls lost due to lack of coverage or available bandwidth), and quality of ser- 
vice data (interference, poor coverage). 
Billing. Financial information appearing on a subscriber's bill (monthly fee, addi- 
tional charges for roaming and additional minutes beyond monthly prepaid limit). 
Customer Service. Calls to the customer service department and their resolutions. 
Application for Service. Information from the initial application for service, includ- 
ing contract details, rate plan, handset type, and credit report. 
Market. Details of rate plans offered by carrier and its competitors, recent entry of 
competitors into market, advertising campaigns, etc. 
Demographics. Geographic and population data of a given region. 
A subset of these information sources were used in the present study. Most notably, we did 
not utilize market information, because the study was conducted over a fairly short time 
interval during which the market did not change significantly. More important, the market 
forces were fairly uniform in the various geographic regions from which our subscribers 
were selected. Also, we were unable to obtain information about the subscriber equipment 
(age and type of handset used). 
The information sources listed above were distributed over three distinct data bases 
maintained by the carrier. The data bases contained thousands of fields, from which we 
identified 134 variables associated with each subscriber which we conjectured might be 
linked to churn. The variables included: subscriber location, credit classification, customer 
classification (e.g., corporate versus retail), number of active services of various types, 
beginning and termination dates of various services, avenue through which services were 
activated, monthly charges and usage, number, dates and nature of customer service calls, 
number of calls made, and number of abnormally terminated calls. 
2.2 DATA REPRESENTATION 
As all statisticians and artificial intelligence researchers appreciate, representation is key. 
A significant portion of our effort involved working with domain experts in the wireless 
telecommunications industry to develop a representation of the data that highlights and 
makes explicit those features which--in the expert's judgement--were highly related to 
churn. To evaluate the benefit of carefully constructing the representation, we performed 
TABLE 1. Factors influencing subscriber satisfaction 
Factor Importance Nature of data required for prediction 
call quality 21% network 
pricing options 18% market, billing 
corporate capability 17% market, customer service 
customer service 17% customer service 
credibility / customer communications 10% market, customer service 
roaming / coverage 7% network 
handset
