A Comparison of Dynamic Reposing and 
Tangent Distance for Drug Activity 
Prediction 
Thomas CI. Dietterich 
Arris Pharmaceutical Corporation and Oregon State University 
Corvallis, OR 97331-3202 
Ajay N. Jain 
Arris Pharmaceutical Corporation 
385 Oyster Point Blvd., Suite 3 
South San Francisco, CA 94080 
Richard H. Lathrop and Tomas Lozano-Perez 
Arris Pharmaceutical Corporation and MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
545 Technology Square 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
Abstract 
In drug activity prediction (as in handwritten character recogni- 
tion), the features extracted to describe a training example depend 
on the pose (location, orientation, etc.) of the example. In hand- 
written character recognition, one of the best techniques for ad- 
dressing this problem is the tangent distance method of Simard, 
LeCun and Denker (1993). Jain, et al. (1993a; 1993b) introduce a 
new technique--dynamic reposing--that also addresses this prob- 
lem. Dynamic reposing iteratively learns a neural network and then 
reposes the examples in an effort to maximize the predicted out- 
put values. New models are trained and new poses computed until 
models and poses converge. This paper compares dynamic reposing 
to the tangent distance method on the task of predicting the bio- 
logical activity of musk compounds. In a 20-fold cross-validation, 
216 
A Comparison of Dynamic Reposing and Tangent Distance for Drug Activity Prediction 217 
dynamic reposing attains 91% correct compared to 79% for the 
tangent distance method, 75% for a neural network with standard 
poses, and 75% for the nearest neighbor method. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The task of drug activity prediction is to predict the activity of proposed drug 
compounds by learning from the observed activity of previously-synthesized drug 
compounds. Accurate drug activity prediction can save substantial time and money 
by focusing the efforts of chemists and biologists on the synthesis and testing of 
compounds whose predicted activity is high. If the requirements for highly active 
binding can be displayed in three dimensions, chemists can work from such displays 
to design new compounds having high predicted activity. 
Drug molecules usually act by binding to localized sites on large receptor molecules 
or large enyzme molecules. One reasonable way to represent drug molecules is 
to capture the location of their surface in the (fixed) frame of reference of the 
(hypothesized) binding site. By learning constraints on the allowed location of 
the molecular surface (and important charged regions on the surface), a learning 
algorithm can form a model of the binding site that can yield accurate predictions 
and support drug design. 
The training data for drug activity prediction consists of molecules (described by 
their structures, i.e., bond graphs) and measured binding activities. There are two 
complications that make it difficult to learn binding site models from such data. 
First, the bond graph does not uniquely determine the shape of the molecule. The 
bond graph can be viewed as specifying a (possibly cyclic) kinematic chain which 
may have several internal degrees of freedom (i.e., rotatable bonds). The confor- 
mations that the graph can adopt, when it is embedded in 3-space, can be assigned 
energies that depend on such intramolecular interactions as the Coulomb attraction, 
the van der Waal's force, internal hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic interactions. 
Algorithms exist for searching through the space of conformations to find local 
minima having low energy (these are called conformers). Even relatively rigid 
molecules may have tens or even hundreds of low energy conformers. The training 
data does not indicate which of these conformers is the bioactive one--that is, 
the conformer that binds to the binding site and produces the observed binding 
activity. 
Second, even if the bioactive conformer were known, the features describing the 
molecular surface--because they are measured in the frame of reference of the bind- 
ing site--change as the molecule rotates and translates (rigidly) in space. 
Hence, if we consider feature space, each training example (bond graph) induces a 
family of 6-dimensional manifolds. Each manifold corresponds to one conformer as 
it rotates and translates (6 degrees of freedom) in space. For a classification task, 
a positive decision region for active molecules would be a region that intersects 
at least one manifold of each active molecule and no manifolds of any inactive 
molecules. Finding such a decision region is quite difficult, because the manifolds 
are difficult to compute. 
218 Dietterich, Jain, Lathrop, and Lozano-Perez 
A similar feature manifold problem arises in handwritten character recognition. 
There, the training examples are labelled handwritten digits, the features are ex- 
tracted by taking a digitized gray-scale picture, and the feature values depend on 
the rotation, translation, and zoom of the camera with respect to the character. 
We can formalize this situation as follows. Let xi, i -- 1,..., N be training exam- 
ples (i.e., bond graphs or physical handwritten digits), and let f(:ri) be the label 
associated with :ri (i.e., the measured activity of the molecule or the identity of the 
handwritten digit). Suppose we extract n real-valued features V(zi) to describe ob- 
ject :ri and then employ, for example, a multilayer sigmoid network to approximate 
f(:r) by ](x) = g(V(x)). This is the ordinary supervised learning task. 
However, the feature manifold problem arises when the extracted features depend 
on the pose of the example. We will define the pose to be a vector p of parameters 
that describe, for example, the rotation, translation, and conformation of a molecule 
or the rotation, translation, scale, and line thickness of a handwritten digit. In this 
case, the feature vector V(x,p) depends on both the example and the pose. 
Within the handwritten character recognition community, several techniques have 
been developed for dealing with the feature manifold problem. Three existing ap- 
proaches are standardized poses, the tangent-prop method, and the tangent-distance 
method. Jain et al. (1993a, 1993b) describe a new method--dynamic reposing-- 
that applies supervised learning simultaneously to discover the best pose p? of 
each training example a:i and also to learn an approximation to the unknown func- 
tion f(:r) as ](:ri) = g(V(:ri,p?)). In this paper, we briefly review each of these 
methods and then compare the performance of standardized poses, tangent dis- 
tance, and dynamic reposing to the problem of predicting the activity of musk 
molecules. 
2 
FOUR APPROACHES TO THE FEATURE 
MANIFOLD PROBLEM 
2.1 STANDARDIZED POSES 
The simplest approach is to select only one of the feature vectors V(:ri,pi) for each 
example by constructing a function, Pi = ,S'(:ri), that computes a standard pose 
for each object. Once Pi is chosen for each example, we have the usual super- 
vised learning task--each training example has a unique feature vector, and we can 
approximate f by ](:r)= g(V(x,,S'(:r))). 
The difficulty is that S can be very hard to design. In optical character recognition, 
S typically works by computing some pose-invariant properties (e.g., principal axes 
of a circumscribing ellipse) of xi and then choosing pi to translate, rotate, and scale 
:ri to give these properties standard values. Errors committed by OCR algorithms 
can often be traced to errors in the S function, so that characters are incorrectly 
positioned for recognition. 
In drug activity prediction, the standardizing function S must guess which con- 
former is the bioactive conformer. This is exceedingly difficult to do without addi- 
tional information (e.g., 3-D atom coordinates of the molecule bound in the binding 
A Comparison of Dynamic Reposing and Tangent Distance for Drug Activity Prediction 219 
site as determined by x-ray crystallography). In addition, $ must determine the 
orientation of the bioactive conformers within the binding site. This is also quite 
difficult--the bioactive conformers must be mutually aligned so that shared poten- 
tial chemical interactions (e.g., hydrogen bond donors) are superimposed. 
2.2 TANGENT PROPAGATION 
The tangent-prop approach (Simard, Victorri, LeCun, & Denker, 1992) also em- 
ploys a standardizing function $, but it augments the learning procedure with the 
constraint that the output of the learned function g(V(x,p)) should be invariant 
with respect to slight changes in the poses of the examples: 
Ilvr g(V(x,p))I:s<.ll = 0, 
where [l' 11 indicates Euclidean norm. This constraint is incorporated by using the 
left-hand-side as a regularizer during backpropagation training. 
Tangent-prop can be viewed as a way of focusing the learning algorithm on those 
input features and hidden-unit features that are invariant with respect to slight 
changes in pose. Without the tangent-prop constraint, the learning algorithm 
may identify features that accidentally discriminate between classes. However, 
tangent-prop still assumes that the standard poses are correct. This is not a safe 
assumption in drug activity prediction. 
2.3 TANGENT DISTANCE 
The tangent-distance approach (Simard, LeCun & Denker, 1993) is a variant of the 
nearest-neighbor algorithm that addresses the feature manifold problem. Ideally, 
the best distance metric to employ for the nearest-neighbor algorithm with feature 
manifolds is to compute the manifold distance--the point of nearest approach 
between two manifolds: 
manifold-dist (x, x2) = min IIV(x,px) - v(2,p2)ll. 
P 
This is very expensive to compute, however, because the manifolds can have highly 
nonlinear shapes in feature space, so the manifold distance can have many local 
minima. 
The tangent distance is an approximation to the manifold distance. It is computed 
by approximating the manifold by a tangent plane in the vicinity of the standard 
poses.
