367 
SCHEMA FOR MOTOR CONTROL 
UTILIZING A NETWORK MODEL OF THE CEREBELLUM 
James C. Houk, Ph.D. 
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 
60201 
ABSTRACT 
This paper outlines a schema for movement control 
based on two stages of signal processing. The higher stage 
is a neural network model that treats the cerebellum as an 
array of adjustable motor pattern generators. This network 
uses sensory input to preset and to trigger elemental 
pattern generators and to evaluate their performance. The 
actual patterned outputs, however, are produced by intrin- 
sic circuitry that includes recurrent loops and is thus 
capable of self-sustained activity. These patterned 
outputs are sent as motor commands to local feedback 
systems called motor servos. The latter control the forces 
and lengths of individual muscles. Overall control is thus 
achieved in two stages: (1) an adaptive cerebellar network 
generates an array of feedforward motor commands and (2) a 
set of local feedback systems translates these commands 
into actual movements. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is considerable evidence that the cerebellum is 
involved in the adaptive control of movement 1, although the 
manner in which this control is achieved is not well under- 
stood. As a means of probing these cerebellar mechanisms, 
my colleagues and I have been conducting microelectrode 
studies of the neural messages that flow through the inter- 
mediate division of the cerebellum and onward to limb 
muscles via the rubrospinal tract. We regard this cerebel- 
lorubrospinal pathway as a useful model system for studying 
general problems of sensorimotor integration and adaptive 
brain function. A summary of our findings has been pub- 
lished as a book chapter 2. 
On the basis of these and other neurophysiological 
results, I recently hypothesized that the cerebellum func- 
tions as an array of adjustable motor pattern generators 3. 
The outputs from these pattern generators are assumed to 
function as motor commands, i.e., as neural control signals 
that are sent to lower-level motor systems where they 
produce movements. According to this hypothesis, the 
cerebellum uses its extensive sensory input to preset the 
@ American Institute of Physics 1988 
368 
pattern generators, to trigger them to initiate the 
production of patterned outputs and to evaluate the success 
or failure of the patterns in controlling a motor behavior. 
However, sensory input appears not to play a major role in 
shaping the waveforms of the patterned outputs. Instead, 
these waveforms seem to be produced by intrinsic circuity. 
The initial purpose of the present paper is to provide 
some ideas for a neural network model of the cerebellum 
that might be capable of accounting for adjustable motor 
pattern generation. Several previous authors have 
described network models of the cerebellum that, like the 
present model, are based on the neuroanatomical organiza- 
tion of this brain structure4,5, 6. While the present model 
borrows heavily from these previous models, it has some 
additional features that may explain the unique manner in 
which the cerebellum processes sensory input to produce 
motor commands. A second purpose of this paper is to 
outline how this network model fits within a broader schema 
for motor control that I have been developing over the past 
several years 3,7. Before presenting these ideas, let me 
first review some basic physiology and anatomy of the 
cerebellum 1 . 
SIGNALS AND CIRCUITS IN THE CEREBELLUM 
There are three main categories of input fibers to the 
cerebellum, called mossy fibers, climbing fibers and 
noradrenergic fibers. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the mossy 
fiber input shows considerable fan-out via granule cells 
and parallel fibers. The parallel fibers in turn are 
arranged to provide a high degree of fan-in to individual 
Purkinje cells (P). These P cells are the sole output 
elements of the cortical portion of the cerebellum. Via 
the parallel fiber input, each P cell is exposed to 
approximately 200,000 potential messages. In marked 
contrast, the climbing fiber input to P cells is highly 
focused. Each climbing fiber branches to only 10 P cells, 
and each cell receives input from only one climbing fiber. 
Although less is known about input via noradrenergic 
fibers, it appears to be diffuse and even more divergent 
than the mossy fiber input. 
Mossy fibers originate from several brain sites trans- 
mitting a diversity of information about th external world 
and the internal state of the body. Some mossy fiber 
inputs are clearly sensory. They come fairly directly from 
cutaneous, muscle or vestibular receptors. Others are 
routed via the cerebral cortex where they represent highly 
processed visual, auditory or somatosensory information. 
Yet another category of mossy fiber transmits information 
about central motor commands (Fig. 1 shows one such path- 
way, from collaterals of the rubrospinal tract relayed 
369 
through the lateral reticular nucleus (L)). The discharge 
rates of mossy fibers are modulated over a wide dynamic 
range which permits them to transmit detailed parametric 
information about the state of the body and its external 
environment. 
noradrenergic 
fibers 
climbing 
fiber 
granule 
cells  
mossy fibers  
Sensory 
Inputs 
sensorimotor 
cortex 
rubrospinal tract 
Motor 
Commands 
Figure 1: Pathways through the cerebellum. This diagram, 
which highlights the cerebellorubrospinal system, also 
constitutes a circuit diagram for the model of an 
elemental pattern generator. 
The sole source of climbing fibers is from cells 
located in the inferior olivary nucleus. Olivary neurons 
are selectively sensitive to sensory events. These cells 
have atypical electrical properties which limit their 
discharge to rates less than 10 impulses/sec, and usual 
rates are closer to 1 impulse/sec. As a consequence, 
370 
individual climbing fibers transmit very little parametric 
information about the intensity and duration of a stimulus; 
instead, they appear to be specialized to detect simply the 
occurrences of sensory events. There are also motor inputs 
to this pathway, but they appear to be strictly inhibitory. 
The motor inputs gate off responsiveness to self-induced 
(or expected) stimuli, thus converting olivary neurons into 
detectors of unexpected sensory events. 
Given the abundance of sensory input to P cells via 
mossy and climbing fibers, it is remarkable that these 
cells respond so weakly to sensory stimulation. Instead, 
they discharge vigorously during active movements. P cells 
send abundant collaterals to their neighbors, while their 
main axons project to the cerebellar nuclei and then onward 
to several brain sites that in turn relay motor commands to 
the spinal cord. 
Fig. 1 shows P cell projections to the intermediate 
cerebellar nucleus (I), also called the interpositus 
nucleus. The red nucleus (R) receives its main input from 
the interpositus nucleus, and it then transmits motor 
commands to the spinal cord via the rubrospinal tract. 
Other premotor nuclei that are alternative sources of motor 
commands receive input from alternative cerebellar output 
circuits. Fig. 1 thus specifically illustrates the 
cerebellorubrospinal system, the portion of the cerebellum 
that has been emphasized in my laboratory. 
Microelectrode recordings from the red nucleus have 
demonstrated signals that appear to represent detailed 
velocity commands for distal limb movements. Bursts of 
discharge precede each movement, the frequency of discharge 
within the burst corresponds to the velocity of movement, 
and the duration of the burst corresponds to the duration 
of movement. These velocity signals are not shaped by 
continuous feedback from peripheral receptors; instead, 
they appear to be produced centrally. An important goal of 
the modelling effort outlined here is to explain how these 
velocity commands might be produced by cerebellar circuits 
that function as elemental pattern generators. I will then 
discuss how an array of these pattern generators might 
serve well in an overall schema of motor control. 
ELEMENTAL PATTERN GENERATORS 
The motivation for proposing pattern generators rather 
than more conventional network designs derives from the 
experimental observation that motor commands, once initiat- 
ed, are not affected, or are only minimally affected, by 
alterations in sensory input. This observation indicates 
that the temporal features of these motor commands are 
produced by self-sustained activity within the neural 
network rather than by the time courses of network inputs. 
371 
Two features of the intrinsic circuitry of the cere- 
bellum may be particularly instrumental in explaining self- 
sustained activity. One is a recurrent pathway from cere- 
bellar nuclei that returns back to cerebellar nuclei. In 
the case of the cerebellorubrospinal system in Fig. 1, the 
recurrent pathway is from the interpositus nucleus to red 
nucleus to lateral reticular nucleus and back to interposi- 
tus, what I will call the IRL loop. The other feature of 
intrinsic cerebellar circuitry that may be of critical 
importance in pattern generation is mutual inhibition 
between P cells. Fig. 1 shows how mutual inhibition 
results from the recurrent collaterals of P-cell axons. 
Inhibitory interneurons called basket and stellate cells 
(not shown in Fig. 1) provide additional pathways for 
mutual inhibition. Both the IRL loop and mutual inhibition 
between P cells constitute positive feedback circuits and, 
as such, are capable of self-sustained activity. 
Self-sustained activity in the form of high-frequency 
spontaneous discharge has been observed in the IRL loop 
under conditions in which the inhibitory P-cell input to I 
cells is blocked 3. Trace A in Fig. 2 shows this unre- 
strained discharge schematically, and the other traces 
illustrate how a motor command might be sculpted out of 
this tendency toward high-freq
