FEEDBACK SYNAPSE TO CONE AND LIGHT ADAPTATION 
Josef Skrzypek 
Machine Perception Laboratory 
UCLA - Los Angeles, California 90024 
INTERNET: SKRZYPEK@CS.UCLA.EDU 
Abstract 
Light adaptation (LA) allows cone vision to remain functional between 
twilight and the brightest time of day even though, at any one time, their 
intensity-response (I-R) characteristic is limited to 3 log units of the stimu- 
lating light. One mechanism underlying LA, was localized in the outer seg- 
ment of an isolated cone (1,2). We found that by adding annular illtmination, 
an I-R characteristic of a cone can be shifted along the intensity domain. 
Neural network involving feedback synapse from horizontal cells to cones is 
involved to be in register with ambient light level of the periphery. An 
equivalent electrical circuit with three different transmembrane channels 
leakage, photocurrent and feedback was used to model static behavior of a 
cone. SPICE simulation showed that interactions between feedback synapse 
and the light sensitive conductance in the outer segment can shift the I-R 
curves along the intensity domain, provided that phototransduction mechan- 
ism is not saturated during maximally hyperpolarizcd light response. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Light response in cones 
In the vertebrate retina, cones respond to a small spot of light with sustained hyperpolari- 
zation which is graded with the stimulus over three log units of intensity [5]. Mechan- 
isms underlying this I-R relation was suggested to result from statistical superposition of 
invariant single-photon, hyperpolarizing responses involvnig sodium conductance 
changes that are gated by cyclic nucleotides (see 6). The shape of the response measured 
in cones depends on the size of the stimulating spot of light, presumably because of peri- 
pheral signals mediated by a negative feedback synapse from horizontal cells [7,8]; the 
hyperpolarizing response to the spot illumination in the central portion of the cone recep- 
tive field is antagonized by light in the surrounding periphery [11,12,13]. Thus the cone 
391 
392 Skrzypek 
membrane is influenced by two antagonistic effects; 1) feedback, driven by peripheral il- 
lumination and 2) the light sensitive conductance, in the cone outer segment. Although it 
has been shown that key aspects of adaptation can be observed in isolated cones [1,2,3], 
the effects of peripheral illumination on adaptation as related to feedback input from hor- 
izontal cells have not been examined. It was reported that under appropriate stimulus 
conditions the resting membrane potential for a cone can be reached at two drastically 
different intensifies for a spot/annulus combinations [8,14]. 
We present here experimental data and modeling results which suggests that results of 
feedback from horizontal cells to cones resemble the effect of the neural component of 
light adaptation in cones. Specifically, peripheral signals mediated via feedback synapse 
reset the cone sensitivity by instantaneously shifting the I-R curves to a new intensity 
domain. The full range of light response potentials is preserved without noticeable 
compression. 
2 RESULTS 
2.1 Identification of cones 
Preparation and the general experimental procedure as well as criteria for identification 
of cones has been detailed in [15,8]. Several criteria were used to distinguish cones from 
other cells in the OPL such as: 1) the depth of recording in the retina [11, 13], 2) the se- 
quence of penetrations concomitant with characteristic light responses, 3) spectral 
response curves [18], 4) receptive field diameter [8], 5) the fastest time from dark poten- 
tial to the peak of the light response [8, 15], 6)domain of I-R curves and 7) staining with 
Lucipher Yellow [8, 11, 13]. These values represent averages derived from all intraeel- 
lular recordings in 37 cones, 84 bipolar cells, more than 1000 horizontal cells, and more 
than 100 rods. 
2.2 Experimental procedure 
After identifying a cone, its I-R curve was recorded. Then, in a presence of center illumi- 
nation (diameter = 100 urn) which elicited maximal hyperpolarization from a cone, the 
periphery of the receptive field was stimulated with an annulus of inner diameter (ID) = 
750 um and the outer diameter (OD) = 1500 um. The annular intensity was adjusted to el- 
icit depolarization of the membrane back to the dark potential level. Finally, the center 
intensity was increased again in a stepwise manner to antagonize the effect of peripheral 
illumination, and this new I-R curve was recorded. 
2.3 Peripheral illumination shifts the I-R curve in cones 
Sustained illumination of a cone with a small spot of light, evokes a hyperpolarizing 
response, which after transient peak gradually repolarizes to some steady level (Fig. la). 
When the periphery of the retina is illuminated with a ring of light in the presence of 
center spot, the antagonistic component of response can be recorded in a form of sus- 
tained depolarization. It has been argued previously that in the tiger salamander cones, 
this type of response in cones is mediated via synaptic input from horizontal cells. [11, 
12]. 
Feedback Synapse to Cone and Light Adaptation 393 
The significance of this result is that the resting membrane potential for this cone can be 
reached at two drastically different intensities for a spot/annulus combinations; The ac- 
tion of an annular illumination is a fast depolarization of the membrane; the whole pro- 
cess is completed in a fraction of a second unlike the previous reports where the course 
of light-adaptation lasted for seconds or even minutes. 
Response due to spot of light measured at the peak of hyperpolarization, increased in 
magnitude with increasing intensity over three log units (fig. 1.a). The same data is plot- 
ted as open circles in fig. 1.b. Initially, annulus presented during the central illumination 
did not produce a noticeable response. Its amplitude reached maximum when the center 
spot intensity was increased to 3 log units. Further increase of center intensity resulted in 
disappearance of the annulus- elicited depolarization. Feedback action is graded with an- 
nular intensity and it depends on the balance between amount of light falling on the 
center and the surround of the cone receptive field. The change in cone's membrane po- 
tential, due to combined effects of central and annular illumination is plotted as filled cir- 
cles in fig. lb. This new intensity-response curve is shifted along the intensity axis by 
approximately two log units. Both I-R curves span approximately three log units of inten- 
sity. The I-R curve due to combined center and surround illumination can be described 
by the function V/Vm = I/(I+k) [16] where Vm is a peak hyperpolarization and k is a 
constant intensity generating half-maximal response. This relationship [x/(x+k)] was sug- 
gested to be an indication of the light adaptation [2]. The I-R curve plotted using peak 
response values (open circles), fits a continuous line drawn according to equation (1- 
exp(-kx)). This has been argued previously to indicate absence of light adaptation [2,1]. 
There is little if any compression or change in gain after the shift of the cone operating 
point to some new domain of intensity. The results suggest that peripheral illumination 
can shift the center-spot elicited I-R curve of the cone thus resetting the response- 
generating mechanism in cones. 
2.4 Simulation of a cone model 
The results presented in the previous sections imply that maximal hyperpolarization for 
the cone membrane is not limited by the saturation in the phototransduction process 
alone. It seems reasonable to assume that such a limit may be in part determined by the 
batteries of involved ions. Furthermore, it appears that shifting I-R curves along the in- 
tensity domain is not dependent solely on the light adaptation mechanism localized to the 
outer segment of a cone. To test these propositions we developed a simplified cornpart- 
mental model of a cone (Fig. Z) and we exercised it using SPICE (Vladimirescu et al., 
1981). 
All interactions can be modeled using Kirchoff's current law; membrane current is 
Cm(dV/dt)+Iionic. The leakage current is I,. = Ge.(Vm-E0, light sensitive current is 
Iight = Gight*(Vm-Eight) and the feedback current is It = Gn,*(Vm-En,). The left branch 
represents ohmic leakage channels (G,,) which are associated with a constant battery 
El.a ( -70 mV). The middle branch represents the light sensitive conductance (Gight) in 
series with +1 mV ionic battery 0Eigh0 [18]. Light adaptation effects could be incorporat- 
ed here by making Glight time varying and dependent on internal concentration of Calci- 
um ions. In our preliminary studies we were only interested in examining whether the 
shift of I-R is possible and if it would explain the disappearance of depolarizing FB re- 
ponse with hyperpolarization by the center light. This can be done with passive measure- 
ments of membrane potential amplitude. The right-most branch represents ionic channels 
that are controlled by the feedback synapse. With, Efb = -65 mV [11] Gfb is a time and 
voltage independent feedback conductance. 
394 Skrzypek 
The input resistance of an isolated cone is taken to be near 500 Mohm (270 Mohm 
Attwell, et al., 82). Assuming specific membrane resistance of 5000 Ohm*cm*cm and 
that a cone is 40 microns long and has a 8 micron diameter at the base we get the leakage 
conductance Gl, = 1/(1Gohm). In our studies we assume Glk to be linear altghouth 
there is evidence that cone membrane rectifies (Skrzypek, 79). The Glight and Gro are as- 
sumed to be equal and add up to 1/(1Gohm). The Glight varies with light intensity in pro- 
portion of two to three log units of intensity for a tenfold change in conductance. This re- 
lation was derived empirically, by comparing intensity response data obtained from a 
cone {Vm=f(LogI)} to {Vm=f(LogGtit
