A Neural Network to Detect 
Homologies in Proteins 
Yoshua Bengio 
School of Computer Science 
McGill University 
Montreal, Canada H3A 2A7 
Samy Bengio 
Departement d'Informatique 
Universite de Montreal 
Yannick Pouliot 
Department of Biology 
McGill University 
Montreal Neurological Institute 
Patrick Agin 
Departement d'Informatique 
Universite de Montreal 
ABSTRACT 
In order to detect the presence and location of immunoglobu- 
lin (Ig) domains from amino acid sequences we built a system 
based on a neural network with one hidden layer trained with 
back propagation. The program was designed to efficiently 
identify proteins exhibiting such domains, characterized by a 
few localized conserved regions and a low overall homology. 
When the National Biomedical Research Foundation (NBRF) 
NEW protein sequence database was scanned to evaluate the 
program's performance, we obtained very low rates of false 
negatives coupled with a moderate rate of false positives. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Two amino acid sequences from proteins are homologous if they can be 
aligned so that many corresponding amino acids are identical or have similar 
chemical properties. Such subsequences (domains) often exhibit similar three 
dimensional structure. Furthemore, sequence similarity often results from 
common ancestors. Immunoglobulin (Ig) domains are sets of/-sheets bound 
424 Bengio, Bengio, Pouliot and Agin 
by cysteine bonds and with a characteristic tertiary structure. Such domains 
are found in many proteins involved in immune, cell adhesion and receptor 
functions. These proteins collectively form the immunoglobulin superfamily 
(for review, see Williams and Barclay, 1987). Members of the superfamily 
often possess several Ig domains. These domains are characterized by well- 
conserved groups of amino acids localized to specific subregions. Other resi- 
dues outside of these regions are often poorly conserved, such that there is 
low overall homology between Ig domains, even though they are clearly 
members of the same superfamily. 
Current search programs incorporating algorithms such as the Wilbur-Lipman 
algorithm (1983) or the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm (1970) and its modifica- 
tion by Smith and Waterman (1981) are ill-designed for detecting such 
domains because they implicitly consider each amino acid to be equally im- 
portant. This is not the case for residues within domains such as the Ig 
domain, since only some amino acids are well conserved, while most are vari- 
able. One solution to this problem are search algorithms based upon the sta- 
tistical occurrence of a residue at a particular position (Wang et al., 1989; 
Gribskov et al., 1987). The Profile Analysis set of programs published by the 
University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group (Devereux et al., 1984) 
rely upon such an algorithm. Although Profile Analysis can be applied to 
search for domains (c.f. Blaschuk, Pouliot & Holland 1990), the output from 
these programs often suffers from a high rate of false negatives and positives. 
Variations in domain length are handled using the traditional method of penal- 
ties proportional to the number of gaps introduced, their length and their po- 
sition. This approach entails a significant amount of spurious recognition if 
there is considerable variation in domain length to be accounted for. 
We have chosen to address these problems by training a neural network to 
recognize accepted Ig domains. Perceptrons and various types of neural net- 
works have been used previously in biological research with various degrees of 
success (cf. Stormo et al., 1982; Qian and Sejnowski, 1988). Our results sug- 
gest that they are well suited for detecting relatively cryptic sequence patterns 
such as those which characterize Ig domains. Because the design and training 
procedure described below is relatively simple, network-based search pro- 
grams constitute a valid solution to problems such as searching for proteins 
assembled from the duplication of a domain. 
2 ALGORITHM, NETWORK DESIGN AND TRAINING 
The network capitalizes upon data concerning the existence and localization 
of highly conserved groups of amino acids characteristic of the Ig domain. Its 
design is similar in several respects to neural networks we have used in the 
study of speech recognition (Bengio et al., 1989). Four conserved subregions 
(designated P1-P4) of the Ig domain homology were identified. These roughly 
correspond to /-strands B, C, E and F, respectively, of the Ig domain (see 
also Williams and Barclay, 1988). Amino acids in these four groups are not 
necessarily all conserved, but for each subregion they show a distribution very 
different from the distribution generally observed elsewhere in these proteins. 
Hence the first and most important stage of the system learns about these 
joint distributions. The program scans proteins using a window of 5 residues. 
A Neural Network to Detect Homologies in Proteins 425 
The first stage of the system consists of a 2-layer feedforward neural network 
(5 X 20 inputs - 8 hidden - 4 outputs; see Figure 1) trained with back propaga- 
tion (Rumelhart et al., 1986). Better results were obtained for the recognition 
of these conserved regions with this architecture than without hidden layer 
(similar to a perceptron). The second stage evaluates, based upon the stream 
of outputs generated by the first stage, whether and where a region similar to 
the Ig domain has been detected. This stage currently uses a simple dynamic 
programming algorithm, in which constraints about order of subregions and 
distance between them are explicitly programmed. We force the recognizer to 
detect a sequence of high values (above a threshold) for the four conserved 
regions, in the correct order and such that the sum of the values obtained at 
the four recognized regions is greater than a certain threshold. Weak penalties 
are applied for violations of distance constraints between conserved subre- 
gions (e.g., distance between P1 and P2, P2 and P3, etc) based upon simple 
rules derived from our analysis of Ig domains. These rules have little impact if 
strong homologies are detected, such that the program easily handles the large 
variation in domain size exhibited by Ig domains. It was necessary to explicit- 
ly formMate these constraints given the low number of training examples as 
well as the assumption that the distance between groups is not a critical 
discriminating factor. We have assumed that inter-region subsequences prob- 
ably do not significantly influence discrimination. 
o o 
4 output units 
representing 
4 features of 
the Ig domain 
0 0 0 0 0 
8 hidden 
units 
window scanning 5 consecutive residues 
20 
possible 
amino 
adds 
Figure 1: Structure of the neural network 
426 Bengio, Bengio, Pouliot and Agin 
filename : AZZ771.NEW 
input sequence name : Ig epsilon chain C region - Human 
HOMOLOGY starting at 24 
VTLGCLATGYFPEPVMVTWDTGSLNGI-rMTLPAI-fLTLSGHYATISLLTVSGAWAKQMFTC 
P1 P2 P3 P4 
Ending at 84. Score : 3.581 
HOMOLOGY starting at 130 
IQLLCLVSGYTPGTINITWLEDGQVMDVDLSTAS1TQEGELASTQSELTLSQKHWLSDRTYTC 
P1 P2 P3 P4 
Ending at 192. Score : 3.825 
HOMOLOGY starting at 234 
PTITCLWDLAPSKGTVNLTWSRASGKPVNHSTRKEEKQRNGTLTVTSTLPVGTRDWIEGETYQC 
P1 P2 P3 P4 
Ending at 298. Score : 3.351 
HOMOLOGY starting at 340 
RTLACLIQNFMPEDISVQWLHNEVQLPDARHSTTQPRKTKGSGFFVFSRLEVTRAEWEQKDEFIC 
P1 P2 P3 P4 
Ending at 404. Score = 3.402 
Figure 2: Sample output from a search of NEW. Ig domains 
present within the constant region of an epsilon Ig chain 
(NBRF file number A22771) are listed with the position of 
P1-P4 (see text). The overall score for each domain is also list- 
ed. 
As a training set we used a group of 30 proteins comprising bona fide Ig 
domains (Williams and Barclay, 1987). In order to increase the size of the 
training set, additional sequences were stochastically generated by substituting 
residues which are not in critical positions of the domain. These substitutions 
were designed not to affect the local distribution of residues to minimize 
changes in the overall chemical character of the region. 
The program was evaluated and optimized by scanning the NBRF protein da- 
tabases (PROTEIN and NEW) version 19. Results presented below are based 
upon searches of the NEW database (except where otherwise noted) and were 
generated with a cutoff value of 3.0. Only complete sequences from ver- 
tebrates, insects (including Drosophila melanogaster) and eukaryotic viruses 
were scanned. This corresponds to 2422 sequences out of the 4718 present in 
the NEW database. Trial runs with the program indicated that a cutoff thres- 
hold of between 2.7 and 3.0 eliminates the vast majority of false positives with 
little effect upon the rate of false negatives. A sample output is listed in Fig- 
ure 2. 
3 RESULTS 
When the NEW protein sequence database of NBRF was searched as 
described above, 191 proteins were identified to possess at least one Ig 
domain. A scan of the 4718 proteins comprising the NEW database required 
an average of 20 hours of CPU time on a VAX 11/780. This is comparable to 
other computationally intensive programs (e.g., Profile Analysis). When run 
on a SUN 4 computer, similar searches required 1.3 hours of CPU time. This 
is sufficiently fast to allow the user to alter the cutoff threshold repeatedly 
when searching for proteins with low homology. 
A Neural Network to Detect Homologies in Proteins 427 
Table 1: Output from a search of the NEW protein sequence database. 
Domains are sorted according to overall score. 
3.0081 Class II hlstocompeclb. antlgen. HI.A-DR beta- I chain precursor (REM) - Human 3.4295 Ig kappa chain V region - Mouse H 37-80 
3.0148 Nonspecif cross.reacting anti,on pecursor - Human 3.4295 Ig kappa chain V region - Mouse H37-84 
3.OI 61 Platelet-derived growth factor receptor precursor - Mouse 
3.OI64 Tie class I hlstocompatlb. antlgen. TI 3-c alpha chain - Mouse 
3.OI 64 Tie class I 
