A Systematic Study of the Input/Output Properties 149 
A Systematic Study of the Input/Output Properties 
of a 2 Compartment Model Neuron 
With Active Membranes 
Paul Rhodes 
University of California, San Diego 
ABSTRACT 
The input/output properties of a 2 compartment model neuron are systematically 
explored. Taken from the work of MacGregor (MacGregor, 1987), the model neuron 
compartments contain several active conductances, including a potassium conductance in 
the dendritic compartment driven by the accumulation of intradendritic calcium. 
Dynamics of the conductances and potentials are governed by a set of coupled first order 
differential equations which are integrated numerically. There are a set of 17 internal 
parameters to this model, specificying conductance rate constants, time constants, 
thresholds, etc. 
To study parameter sensitivity, a set of trials were run in which the input driving the 
neuron is kept fixed while each internal parameter is varied with all others left fixed. 
To study the input/output relation, the input to the rendrite (a square wave) was varied 
(in frequency and magnitude) while all internal parameters of the system were left fixed, 
and the resulting output firing rate and bursting rate was counted. 
The input/output relation of the model neuron studied turns out to be much more 
sensitive to modulation of certain dendritic potassium current parameters than to 
plasticity of synapse efficacy per se (the amount of current influx due to synapse 
activation). This would in turn suggest, as has been recently observed experimentally, 
that the potassium current may be as or more important a focus of neural plasticity than 
synaptic efficacy. 
INTRODUCTION 
In order to model biologically realistic neural systems, we will ultimately be seeking to 
construct networks with thousands of neurons and millions of interconnections. It is 
therefor desireable to employ basic units with sufficient computational simplicity to 
make meaningful simulations tractable, yet with sufficient fidelity to biological neurons 
that we may retain a hope of gleaning by these simulations something about the activity 
going on during biological information processing. 
150 Rhodes 
The types of neuron models employed in the computational neuroscience literature range 
from binary threshold units to sigmoid transfer functions to 1500 compartment neurons 
with Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics for a whole set of active conductanees and spines with 
rich internal structure. In principle, a model neuron's functional participation in the 
operation of a network may be fully characterized by a complete description of its 
transfer function, or input-output relation. This relation would necessarily be 
parameterized by a host of internal variables (which would include conductance rate 
constants and parameters defining the neuron's morphology) as well as a very rich space 
characterizing possible variations in input (including location of input in dentritic tree). 
In learning to judge which structural elements of highly realistic models must be 
preserved and which may be simplified, one approach will be to test the degree to which 
the input-output relation of the simplified neuron (given a physiologically relevant 
parameter range and input space) is sufficiently dose to the input-output properties of 
the highly realistic model. 
To define 'sufficiently close', we will ultimately refer to the operation of the network as 
a whole as follows: the transfer function of a simplified neuron model will be considered 
'sufficiently close' to a more realistic neuron model if a chosen information processing 
task carried out by the overall network is performed by a network built up of the 
simplified neurons in a manner close to that observed in a network of the more realistic 
neurons. 
We propose to begin by exploring the input/output properties of a greatly simplified 2 
compartment model neuron with active conductances. Even in this very simple structure 
there are many (17) internal parameters for things like time constants and activation rates 
of currents. We wish to understand the parameter sensitivity of this model system and 
characterize its input-output relation. 
1.0 DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL NEURON 
THE MODEL NEURON CONSISTS OF A SOMA WITH A VOLTAGE-GATED 
POTASSIUM CONDUCTANCE AND A SINGLE COMPARTMENT DENDRITE 
WITH A VOLTAGE-GATED CALCIUM CONDUCTANCE AND A [CA]-GATED 
POTASSIUM CONDUCTANCE 
We will choose for this study a simple model neuron described by MacGregor (1987). It 
possesses a single compartment dendrite. This is viewed as a crude approximation to the 
lumped reduction of a dendritic tree. In this approximation, we are neglecting spatial and 
temporal summing of individual synaptic EPSP's distributed over a dendritic tree, as well 
as the spatial and temporal dispersion (smearing) due to transmission to the soma. The 
individual inputs we will be using are large enough to drive the soma to firing, and so 
would represent the summation of many relatively simultaneous individual EPSP's, 
perhaps as from the set of contacts upon a neuron's dendritic tree made by the 
arborization of one different axon. The dendritic membrane possesses a potassium 
conductance gated by intradendritic calcium concentration and a voltage gated calcium 
conductance. The soma contains its own voltage-gated potassium channels and 
membrane time constants. Electrical connection between soma and dendrite is expressed 
by an input impedance in each direction. The soma fires an action potential, simply 
expressed by raising its voltage to 50 mv for one msec after its internal voltage has been 
A Systematic Study of the Input/Output Properties 151 
driven to firing threshold. Calcium accumulation in the dendrite is modelled assuming 
accumulation proportional to calcium conductance. Calcium conductance itself increases 
in proportion to the difference between the dendrite's voltage and a threshold, and calcium 
is removed from the dendrite by means of an exponential decay. This system is modelled 
by a set of coupled fh'st order differential equations as follows: 
1.1 THE SET OF EQUATIONS GOVERNING THE DYNAMIC 
VARIABLES OF THIS MODEL 
The soma's voltage ES is governed by: 
dES/dt={ -ES +SOMAINPUT+GDS*(ED-ES)+GKS*(EK-ES)}/TS 
where SOMAINPUT is obtained by dividing the input current by the total resting 
conductance of the dendrite (therefor it has units of voltage). GDS is proportional to 
input resistance from dendrite to soma, and multiplies the difference between the 
dendrite's voltage ED and the soma's voltage ES; GKS is the soma's aggregate 
potassium conductance (modelled below); EK is the voltage of the pot_assium battery 
(assumed constant at -10mv); and TS is the soma's time constant. All potentials are 
relative to resting potential, and all conductances are dimensionless. 
The dendrite's voltage ED is govened by: 
dED/dt= { -ED+ DENDINPUT +G SD*(ES-ED )+GCA *(EC A-ED )+ GKD*(EK-ED)}/TD 
where DENDINPUT is obtained by dividing the input current by the total resting 
conductance of the dendrite and so has units of voltage. GSD is proportional to the 
input resistance from soma to dendrite, and hence multiplies the difference between ES 
and ED; GCA is the dendrite's calcium conductance (modelled below), ECA is the 
calcium battery (assumed constant at 50mv), and GKD is proportional to the dendrite's 
potassium conductance (modelled below). All potentials are relative to resting potential. 
The soma's voltage is raised artificially to 50my for 1 msec after the soma's voltage 
exceeds a (f'LXed) threshold, thus simplifying the action potential. 
The potassium conductance in the soma, GKS, is governed by: 
dGKS/dt= {-GKS+S*B }/TGK 
where S is 1 if an action potential has just fired and 0 otherwise, B is an activation rate 
constant governing the rate of increase of potassium conductance, and TGK is the time 
constant of the potassium conductance decay. This rather simplified picture of 
potassium conductance will be replaced by a more realistic version with a Markov state 
model of the potassium channel in a subsequent publication in preparation. For the 
present investigation then we are modelling the voltage dependence of the potassium 
conductance by the following: potassium conductance builds up by a fixed amount 
(proportional to B/TGK) during each action potential, and thereafter decays exponentially 
with time constant TGK. 
152 Rhodes 
The dendrite's calcium conductance is governed by: 
dGCA/dt ={-GCA+D*(ED-CSPIKETHRESH)} fIGCA 
dGCA/dt={-GCA/TGCA} 
ED>CSPIKETHRESH 
ED<CSPIKETHRESH 
where CSPIKETHRESH is the minimum dendritic voltage above which calcium 
conducting channels begin to be opened, D is an activation rate governing the rate of 
increase in calcium conductance, and TGCA is the time constant assumed to govern 
conductance decay when voltage is below threshold. 
The dendrite's internal calcium concentration [CA] is governed by: 
d[CA]/dt={-[CAI+A*GCA}/TCA 
where TCA is the time constant for the removal of internal CA, and A is a parameter 
governing the accumulation rate of increase of internal CA for a given conductance and 
time constant. A is inversely proportional to the effective relevant volume in which 
calcium is accumulating. An increase in internal calcium buffer would decrease the 
parameter A. 
Finally, the dendrite's potassium conductance is governed by: 
dGKD/dt ={-GKD+BD}/TGKD 
dGKD/dt={-GKD}/FGKD 
[CA]>CALCTHRESH 
[CA]<CALCTHRESH 
where CALCTHRESH is the internal calcium concentration threshold above which the 
calcium gated potassium channel begins to open, BD is the parameter governing the rate 
of increase of dendritic potassium conductance, and TGKD is the time constant 
governing the exponential decay of potassium conductance. 
This entire system of equations is taken from the work of MacGregor 
(MacGregor, 1987). 
The system of coupled in'st order differential equations is integrate
