A 
Model of the Neural Basis of the Rat's 
Sense of Direction 
William E. Skaggs 
bill@nsma. arizona. edu 
James J. Knierim 
jira@nsraa. arizona. edu 
Hemant S. Kudrimoti 
hemant@nsma. arizona. edu 
Bruce L. McNaughton 
bruce@nsma. arizona. edu 
APL Division of Neural Systems, Memory, And Aging 
344 Life Sciences North, University of Arizona, Tucson AZ 85724 
Abstract 
In the last decade the outlines of the neural structures subserving 
the sense of direction have begun to emerge. Several investigations 
have shed light on the effects of vestibular input and visual input 
on the head direction representation. In this paper, a model is 
formulated of the neural mechanisms underlying the head direction 
system. The model is built out of simple ingredients, depending on 
nothing more complicated than connectional specificity, attractor 
dynamics, Hebbian learning, and sigmoidal nonlinearities, but it 
behaves in a sophisticated way and is consistent with most of the 
observed properties of real head direction cells. In addition it makes 
a number of predictions that ought to be testable by reasonably 
straightforward experiments. 
I Head Direction Cells in the Rat 
There is quite a bit of behavioral evidence for an intrinsic sense of direction in 
many species of mammals, including rats and humans (e.g., Gallistel, 1990). The 
first specific information regarding the neural basis of this sense came with the 
discovery by Panck (1984) of a population of head direction cells in the dorsal 
presubiculum (also known as the postsubiculum) of the rat. A head direction cell 
1 74 William Skaggs, James J. Knierim, Hemant S. Kudrimoti, Bruce L. McNaughton 
fires at a high rate if and only if the rat's head is oriented in a specific direction. 
Many things could potentially cause a cell to fire in a head-direction dependent 
manner: what made the postsubicular cells particularly interesting was that when 
their directionality was tested with the rat at different locations, the head directions 
corresponding to maxima] firing were consistently parallel, within the experimental 
resolution. This is difficult to explain with a simple sensory-based mechanism; it 
implies something more sophisticated. x 
The postsubicular head direction cells were studied in depth by Taube et al. 
(1990a,b), and, more recently, head direction cells have also been found in other 
parts of the rat brain, in particular the anterior nuclei of the thalamus (Mizumori 
and Williams, 1993) and the retrosplenial (posterior cingulate) cortex (Chen et 
al., 1994a,b). Interestingly, all of these areas are intimately associated with the 
hippocampal formation, which in the rat contains large numbers of place cells. 
Thus, the brain contains separate but neighboring populations of cells coding for 
location and cells coding for direction, which taken together represent much of the 
information needed for navigation. 
Figure 1 shows directional tuning curves for three typical head direction cells from 
the anterior thalamus. In each of them the breadth of tuning is on the order of 90 
degrees. This value is also typical for head direction cells in the postsubiculum and 
retrosplenial cortex, though in each of the three areas individual cells may show 
considerable variability. 
Figure 1: Polar plots of directional tuning (mean firing rate as a function of head 
direction) for three typical head direction cells from the anterior thalamus of a rat. 
Every study to date has indicated that the head direction cells constitute a unitary 
system, together with the place cells of the hippocampus. Whenever two head 
direction cells have been recorded simultaneously, any manipulation that caused 
one of them to shift its directional alignment caused the other to shift by the same 
amount; and when head direction cells have been recorded simultaneously with 
place cells, any manipulation that caused the head direction cells to realign either 
caused the hippocampal place fields to rotate correspondingly or to remap into a 
different pattern (Knierim et al., 1995). 
Head direction cells maintain their directional tuning for some time when the lights 
in the recording room are turned off, leaving an animal in complete darkness; the 
directionality tends to gradually drift, though, especially if the animal moves around 
(Mizumori and Williams, 1993). Directional tuning is preserved to some degree even 
Sensitivity to the Earth's geomagnetic field has been ruled out as an explanation of 
head-directional firing. 
A Model of the Neural Basis of the Rat's Sense of Direction 175 
if a aimal is passively rotated in the dark, which indicates strongly that the head 
direction system receives information (possibly indirect) from the vestibular system. 
Visual input influences but does not dictate the behavior of head direction cells. 
The nature of this influence is quite interesting. In a recent series of experiments 
(Knierim et al., 1995), rats were trained to forage for food pellets in a gray cylinder 
with a single salient directionM cue, a white card covering 90 degrees of the wM1. 
During training, half of the rats were disoriented before being placed in the cylin- 
der, in order to disrupt the relation between their internM sense of direction and 
the location of the cue card; the other half of the rats were not disoriented. Pre- 
sumably, the rats that were not disoriented during training experienced the same 
initial relationship between their internM direction sense axed the cue card each time 
they were placed in the cylinder; this would not have been true of the disoriented 
rats. Head direction cells in the thalamus were subsequently recorded from both 
groups of rats as they moved in the cylinder. All rats were disoriented before each 
recording session. Under these conditions, the cue card had much weaker control 
over the head direction cells in the rats that had been disoriented during training 
than in the rats that had not been disoriented. For M1 rats the influence of the cue 
card upon the head direction system weakened gradually over the course of multiple 
recording sessions, emd eventually they broke free, but this happened much sooner 
in the rats that had been disoriented during training. The authors concluded that 
a visual cue could only develop a strong influence upon the head direction system if 
the rat experienced it as stable. 
Figure 2 illustrates the shifts in alignment during a typical recording session. When 
the rat is initially placed in the cylinder, the cell's tuning curve is aligned to the 
west. Over the first few minutes of recording it gradually rotates to SSW, and there 
it stays. Note the tail of the curve. This comes from spikes belonging to another, 
neighboring head direction cell, which could not be perfectly isolated from the first. 
Note that, even though they come from different cells, both portions shift alignment 
synchronously. 
Figure 2: Shifts in alignment of a head direction cell over the course of a single 
recording session (one minute intervals). 
2 The Model 
As reviewed above, the most important facts to be accounted for by any model of 
the head direction system are (1) the shape of the tuning curves for head direction 
cells, (2) the control of head direction cells by vestibular input, axed (3) the stability- 
dependent influence of visual cues on head direction cells. We introduce here a 
1 76 William Skaggs, James J. Knierim, Hemant S. Kudrimoti, Bruce L. McNaughton 
model that accounts for these facts. It is a refinement of a model proposed earlier 
by McNaughton et al. (1991), the main addition being a more specific account of 
neural connections and dynamics. The aim of this effort is to develop the simplest 
possible architecture consistent with the available data. The reality is sure to be 
more complicated than this model. 
Figure 3 schematically illustrates the architecture of the model. There are four 
groups of cells in the model: head direction cells, rotation cells (left and right), 
vestibular cells (left and right), and visual feature detectors. For expository pur- 
poses it is helpful to think of the network as a set of circular layers; this does not 
reflect the anatomical organization of the corresponding cells in the brain. 
Figure 3: Architecture of the head direction cell model. 
The head direction cell group has intrinsic connections that are stronger than any 
other connections in the model, and dominate their dynamics, so that other inputs 
only provide relatively small perturbations. The connections between them are 
set up so that the only possible stable state of the system is a single localized 
cluster of active cells, with all other cells virtually silent. This will occur if there 
are strong excitatory connections between neighboring cells, and strong inhibitory 
connections between distant cells. It is assumed that the network of interconnections 
has rotation and reflection symmetry. Small deviations from symmetry will not 
impair the model too much; large deviations may cause it to have strong attractors 
at a few points on the circle, which would cause problems. 
The crucial property of this network is the following. Suppose it is in a stable state, 
with a single cluster of activated cells at one point on the circle, and suppose an 
external input is applied that excites the cells selectively on one side (left or right) 
A Model of the Neural Basis of the Rat's Sense of Direction 177 
of the peak. Then the peak will rotate toward the side at which the input is applied, 
and the rate of rotation will increase with the strength of the input. 
This feature is exploited by the mechanisms for vestibular and visual control of 
the system. The vestibular mechanism operates via a layer of rotation cells, 
corresponding to the circle of head direction cells (Units with a similar role were 
referred to as H x H' cells in the McNaughton et al. (1991) model). There 
r
