Hidden Markov Models for Human 
Genes 
Pierre Baldi * 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91109 
Soren Brunak 
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis 
The Technical University of Denmark 
DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark 
Yves Chauvin 1 
Net-ID, Inc. 
601 Minnesota 
San Francisco, CA 94107 
Jacob Engelbrecht 
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis 
The Technical University of Denmark 
DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark 
Anders Krogh 
Electronics Institute 
The Technical University of Denmark 
DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark 
Abstract 
Human genes are not continuous but rather consist of short cod- 
ing regions (exons) interspersed with highly variable non-coding 
regions (introns). We apply HMMs to the problem of modeling ex- 
ons, introns and detecting splice sites in the human genome. Our 
most interesting result so far is the detection of particular oscilla- 
tory patterns, with a minimal period of roughly 10 nucleotides, that 
seem to be characteristic of exon regions and may have significant 
biological implications. 
*and Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology. 
rand Department of Psychology, Stanford University. 
761 
762 Baldi, Brunak, Chauvin, Engelbrecht, and Krogh 
oxon intron 
EXON 
3' splice site 
acceptor site 
5' splice site 
donor site 
CONSENSUS SEQUENCES 
I I  I    I  I NTCAG G 
CCCCCCCC 
AG GTAGT 
Figure 1: Structure of eukaryotic genes (not to scale: introns are typically much 
longer than exons). 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The genes of higher organisms are not continuous. Rather, they consist of relatively 
short coding regions called exons interspersed with non-coding regions of highly vari- 
able length called introns (Fig. 1). A complete gene may comprise as many as fifty 
exons. Very often, exons encode discrete functional or structural units of proteins. 
Prior to the translation of genes into proteins, a complex set of biochemical mecha- 
nisms is responsible for the precise cutting of genes at the splice junctions, i.e. the 
boundaries between introns and exons, and the subsequent removal and ligation 
which results in the production of mature messenger RNA. The translation ma- 
chinery of the cell operates directly onto the mRNA, converting a primary sequence 
of nucleotides into the corresponding primary sequence of amino acids, according 
to the rules of the genetic code. The genetic code converts every three contiguous 
nucleotides, or codons, into one of the twenty antino acids (or into a stop signal). 
Therefore the splicing process must be exceedingly precise since a shift of only one 
base pair completely upsets the codon reading frame for translation. Many details 
of the splicing process are not known; in particular it is not clear how acceptor sites 
(i.e. intron/exon boundaries) and donor sites (i.e. exon/intron boundaries) are rec- 
ognized with extremely high accuracy. Both acceptor and donor sites are signaled 
by the existence of consensus sequences, i.e. short sequences of nucleotides which 
are highly conserved across genes and, to some extent, across species. For instance, 
Hidden Markov Models for Human Genes 763 
most introns start with GT and terminate with /lG and additional patterns can be 
detected in the proximity of the splice sites. The main problem with consensus 
sequences, in addition to their variability, is that by themselves they are insufficient 
for reliable splice site detection. Indeed, whereas exons are relatively short with an 
average length around 150 nucleotides, introns are often much longer, with several 
thousand of seemingly random nucleotides. Therefore numerous false positive con- 
sensus signals are bound to occur inside the introns. The GT dinucleotide constitutes 
roughly 5% of the dinucleotides in human DNA, but only a very small percentage of 
these belongs to the splicing donor category, in the order of 1.5%. The dinucleotide 
/IG constitutes roughly 7.5% of all the dinucleotides and only around 1% of these 
function as splicing acceptor sites. In addition to consensus sequences at the splice 
sites, there seem to exist a number of other weak signals (Senapathy (1989), Brunak 
et al. (1992)) embedded in the 100 intron nucleotides upstream and downstream of 
an exon. Partial experimental evidence seems also to suggest that the recognition 
of the acceptor and donor boundaries of an exon may be a concerted process. 
In connection with the current exponential growth of available DNA sequences and 
the human genome project, it has become essential to be able to algorithmically 
detect the boundaries between exons and introns and to parse entire genes. Unfor- 
tunately, current available methods are far from performing at the level of accuracy 
required for a systematic parsing of the entire human genome. Most likely, gene 
parsing requires the statistical integration of several weak signals, some of which are 
poorly known, over length scales of a few hundred nucleotides. Furthermore, initial 
and terminal exons, lacking one of the splice sites, need to be treated separately. 
2 HMMs FOR BIOLOGICAL PRIMARY SEQUENCES 
The parsing problem has been tackled with classical statistical methods and more 
recently using neural networks (Lapedes (1988), Brunak (1991)), with encouraging 
results. Conventional neural networks, however, do not seem ideally suited to han- 
dle the sort of elastic deformations introduced by evolutionary tinkering in genetic 
sequences. Another trend in recent years, has been the casting of DNA and protein 
sequences problems in terms of formal languages using context free grammars, au- 
tomata and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). The combination of machine learning 
techniques which can take advantage of abundant data together with new flexible 
representations appears particularly promising. HMMs in particular have been used 
to model protein families and address a number of task such as multiple alignments, 
classification and data base searches (Baldi et al. (1993) and (1994); Haussler et al. 
(1993); Krogh et al. (1994a); and references therein). It is the success obtained with 
this method on protein sequences and the ease with which it can handle insertions 
and deletions that naturally suggests its application to the parsing problem. 
In Krogh et al. (1994b), HMMs are applied to the problem of detecting coding/non- 
coding regions in bacterial DNA (E. coli), which is characterized by the absence 
of true introns (like other prokaryotes). Their approach leads to a HMM that 
integrates both genie and intergenie regions, and can be used to locate genes fairly 
reliably. A sirrfilar approach for human DNA, that is not based on HMMs, but 
uses dynamic programming and neural networks to combine various gene finding 
techniques, is described in Snyder and Stormo (1993). In this paper we take a 
764 Baldi, Brunak, Chauvin, Engelbrecht, and Krogh 
Main State Entropy Values 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130140150160170 
Main State Position 
Figure 2: Entropy of enfission distribution of main states. 
first step towards parsing the human genome with HMMs by modeling exons (and 
flanking intron regions). 
As in the applications of HMMs to speech or protein modeling, we use left-right 
architectures to model exon regions, intron regions or their boundaries. The ar- 
chitectures typically consist of a backbone of main states flanked by a sequence of 
delete states and a sequence of insert states, with the proper interconnections (see 
Baldi et al. (1994) and Krogh et al. (1994) for more details and Fig. 4 below). The 
data base used in the experiments to be described consists of roughly 2,000 human 
internal exons, with the corresponding adjacent introns, extracted from release 78 
of the GenBank data base. It is essential to remark that, unlike in the previous ex- 
periments on protein families, the exons in the data base are not directly related by 
evolution. As a result, insertions and deletions in the model should be interpreted 
in terms of formal operations on the strings rather than evolutionary events. 
3 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
A number of different HMM training experiments have been carried using different 
classes of sequences including exons only, flanked exons (with 50 or 100 nucleotides 
on each side), introns only, flanked acceptor and flanked donor sites (with 100 
nucleotides on each side) and slightly different architectures and learning algorithms. 
Only a few relevant examples will be given here. 
Hidden Markov Models for Human Genes 765 
Figure 3: Emission distribution from main states. 
In an early experiment, we trained a model of length 350 using 500 flanked ex- 
OhS, with 100 nucleotides on each side, using gradient descent on the negative log- 
likelihood (Baldi and Chauvin (1994)). The exons themselves had variable lengths 
between 50 and 300. The entropy plot (Fig. 2), after 7 gradient descent training 
cycles, reveals that the HMM has learned the acceptor site quite well but appears 
to have some difficulties with the donor site. One possible contributing factor is 
the high variability of the length of the training exons: the model seems to learn 
two donor sites, one for short exons and one for the other exons. The most striking 
pattern, however, is the greater smoothness of the entropy in the exon region. In 
the exon region, the entropy profile is weakly oscillatory, with a period of about 
20 base pairs. Discrimination and t-tests conducted on this model show that it 
is definitely capable of discrinfinating exon regions, but. the confidence level is not 
sufficient yet to reliably search entire genomes. 
A slightly different model was subsequently trained using again 500 flanked exons, 
with the length of the exons between 100 and 200 only. The probability of emitting 
each one of the four nucleotides, across the main states of the model, are plotted 
in Fig. 3, after the sixth gradient descent training cycle. Again the donor site 
seems harder to le
