Optical Implementation of a Self-Organizing 
Feature Extractor 
Dana Z. Anderson*, Claus Benkert, Verena Hebler, Ju-Seog Jang, 
Don Montgomery, and Mark Saffman. 
Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics, University of Colorado and the 
Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder Colorado 80309-0.!9 
Abstract 
We demonstrate a self-organizing system based on photorefrac- 
tive ring oscillators. We employ the system in two ways that 
can both be thought of as feature extractors; one acts on a set 
of images exposed repeatedly to the system strictly as a linear 
feature extractor, and the other serves as a signal demultiplex- 
er for fiber optic communications. Both systems implement 
unsupervised competitive learning embedded within the mode 
interaction dynamics between the modes of a set of ring oscilla- 
tors. After a training period, the modes of the rings become as- 
sociated with the different image features or carrier 
frequencies within the incoming data stream. 
1 Introduction 
Self-organizing networks (Kohonen, Hertz, Domany) discover features or qual- 
ities about their input environment on their own; they learn without a teacher 
making explicit what is to be learned. This property reminds us of several 
ubiquitous behaviors we see in the physical and natural sciences such as pat- 
tern formation, morphogenesis and phase transitions (Domany). While in the 
natural case one is usually satisfied simply to analyze and understand the be- 
havior of a self-organizing system, we usually have a specific function in mind 
that we wish a neural network to perform. That is, in the network case we wish 
to synthesize a system that will perform the desired function. Self-organizing 
principles are particularly valuable when one does not know ahead of time ex- 
actly what to expect from the input to be processed and when it is some prop- 
erty of the input itself that is of interest. For example, one may wish to 
determine some quality about the input statistics - this one can often do by ap- 
plying self-organization principles. However, when one wishes to attribute 
some meaning to the data, self-organization principles are probably poor can- 
didates for this task. 
821 
822 Anderson, Benkert, Hebler, Jang, Montgomery, and Saffman 
It is the behavioral similarity between self-organizing network models and 
physical systems that has lead us to investigate the possibility of implementing 
a self-organizing network function by designing the dynamics for a set of opti- 
cal oscillators. Modes of sets of oscillators undergo competition (Anderson, 
Benkert) much like that employed in competitive learning network models. 
Using photorefractive elements, we have tailored the dynamics of the mode in- 
teraction to perform a learning task. A physical optical implementation of self- 
organized learning serves two functions. Unlike a computer simulation, the 
physical system must obey certain physical laws just like a biological system 
does. We have in mind the consequences of energy conservation, finite gain 
and the effects of noise. Therefore, we might expect to learn something about 
general principles applicable to biological systems from our physical versions. 
Second, there are some applications where an optical system serves as an idea] 
front end' to signal processing. 
Here we take a commonly used supervised approach for extracting features 
from a stream of images and demonstrate how this task can be done in a self- 
organizing manner. The conventional approach employs a holographic corre- 
lator (Vander Lugt). In this technique, various patterns are chosen for recog- 
nition by the optical system and then recorded in holographic media using 
angle-encoded reference beams. When a specific pattern is presented to the ho- 
lographic correlator, the output is determined by the correlation between the 
presented pattern and the patterns that have been recorded as holograms dur- 
ing the 'learning phase'. The angles and intensities of the reconstructed refer- 
ence beams identify the features present in the pattern. Because the 
processing time-scale in holographic systems is determined by the time neces- 
sary for light to scatter off of the holographic grating, the optical correlation 
takes place virtually instantaneously. It is the speed of this correlation that 
makes the holographic approach so interesting. 
While its speed is an asset, the holographic correlator approach to feature ex- 
traction from images is a supervised approach to the problem: an external su- 
pervisor must choose the relevant image features to store in the correlator 
holograms. Moreover the supervisor must provide an angle-encoded reference 
beam for each stored feature. For many applications, it is desirable to have an 
adaptive system that has the innate capacity to discover, in an unsupervised 
fashion, the underlying structure within the input data. 
A photorefractive ring resonator circuit that learns to extract spatially orthog- 
onal features from images is illustrated schematically in figure 1. The resona- 
tor rings in figure i are constructed physically from optical fibers cables. The 
resonator is self-starting and is pumped by images containing the input data 
(White). The resonator learns to associate each feature in the input data set 
with one and only one of the available resonator rings. In other words, when 
the proper feature is present in the input data, the resonator ring with which 
it has become associated will light up. When this feature is absent from the 
input data, the corresponding resonator ring will be dark. 
The self-organizing capabilities of this system arise from the nonlinear dynam- 
Optical Implementation of a Self-Organizing Feature Extractor 823 
 ,_s Acourto-optic 
M odulxa or  
Reflexive 
_rl.l'l. J1Jl  Gain 
ml+ml 
1oo 
multimode fiber 
lllliill 
Figure l: Schematic diagram of the self-organizing photorefractive ring 
resonator. The two signal frequencies, m 1 amd m 2, are identical when 
the circuit is used as a feature extractor and are separated by 280 MHz 
when the system is used as a frequency demultiplexer. 
ics of competition between resonator modes for optical energy within the com- 
mon photorefractive pump crystal (Benkert). We have used this system to ac- 
complish two optical signal processing tasks. In the first case, the resonator 
can learn to distinguish between two spatially orthogonal input images that 
are impressed on the common pump beam in a piece-wise constant fashion. In 
the second case, frequency demultiplexing of a composite input image con- 
structed from two spatially orthogonal image components of different optical 
frequencies can be accomplished (Saffman, 1991b). In both cases, the optical 
system has no a priori knowledge of the input data and self-discovers the im- 
portant structural elements. 
2 A Self-Orgonlzing Photorefractive Ring Resonator 
The experimental design that realizes an optical self-organizing feature extrac- 
tor is shown in figure 1. The optical system consists of a two ring, multimode, 
unidirectional photorefractive ring resonator in which the rings are spatially 
distinct. The resonator rings are defined by loops of 100  core multimode op- 
tical fiber. The gain for both modes is provided by a common BaTiO3 crystal 
that is pumped by optical images presented as speckle patterns from a single 
100  multimode optical fiber. The light source is a single frequency argon-ion 
laser operating at 514.5 nm. The second BaTiO 3 crystal provides reflexive cou- 
pling within the resonator, which ensures that each resonator ring becomes as- 
sociated with only one input feature. 
The input images are generated by splitting the source beam and passing it 
through two acousto-optic modulator cells. The optical signals generated by 
the acousto-optic modulators are then focused into a single 1.5 meter long step- 
index, 100  core, multimode optical fiber. The difference in the angle of inci- 
dence for the two signal beams at the fiber end face is sufficient to ensure that 
the corresponding speckle pattern images are spatially orthogonal (Saffman, 
824 Anderson, Benkert, Hebler, Jang, Montgomery, and Saffman 
1991a). The acousto-optic cells are used in a conventional fashion to shift the 
optical frequency of the carrier signal, and are also used as shutters to impress 
time modulated information on the input signals. When the resonator is oper- 
ating as a feature extractor, both input signals are carried on the same optical 
frequency, but are presented to the resonator sequentially. The presentation 
cycle time of 500 Hz was chosen to be much smaller than the characteristic 
time constant of the BaTiO3 pump crystal. When operating as a frequency de- 
multiplexer, the acousto-optic modulators shift the optical carrier frequencies 
of the input signals such that they are separated by 280 MHz. The two input 
carrier signals are time modulated and mixed into the optical fiber to form a 
composite image composed of two spatially orthogonal speckle patterns having 
different optical frequencies. This composite image is used as the pump beam 
for the resonator. 
3 Unsupervised Competitive Learning 
Correlations between the optical electric fields in images establish the criterion 
for a measure of similarity between different image features. The best mea- 
sure of these correlations is the inner product between the complex-valued spa- 
tial electric field distribution across the input images, 
When S12 = 0 the images are uncorrelated and we define such images as spa- 
tially orthogonal. When the resonator begins to oscillate, neither resonator 
ringhas any preference for a particular input feature or frequency. The system 
modes have no internal bias (i.e., no a priori knowledge) for the input data. As 
the gain for photorefractive two-beam coupling in the common BaTiO3 pump 
crystal saturates, the two resonator rings begin to comp
