A comparison between neural networks 
and other statistical techniques for 
modeling the relationship between 
tobacco and alcohol and cancer 
Tony Plate 
BC Cancer Agency 
601 West 10th Ave, Epidemiology 
Vancouver BC Canada V5Z 1L3 
tap@comp.vuw.ac.nz 
Pierre Band 
BC Cancer Agency 
601 West 10th Ave, Epidemiology 
Vancouver BC Canada V5Z 1L3 
Joel Bert 
Dept of Chemical Engineering 
University of British Columbia 
2216 Main Mall 
Vancouver BC Canada V6T 1Z4 
John Grace 
Dept of Chemical Engineering 
University of British Columbia 
2216 Main Mall 
Vancouver BC Canada V6T 1Z4 
Abstract 
Epidemiological data is traditionally analyzed with very simple 
techniques. Flexible models, such as neural networks, have the 
potential to discover unanticipated features in the data. However, 
to be useful, flexible models must have effective control on overfit- 
ting. This paper reports on a comparative study of the predictive 
quality of neural networks and other flexible models applied to real 
and artificial epidemiological data. The results suggest that there 
are no major unanticipated complex features in the real data, and 
also demonstrate that MacKay's [1995] Bayesian neural network 
methodology provides effective control on overfitting while retain- 
ing the ability to discover complex features in the artificial data. 
I Introduction 
Traditionally, very simple statistical techniques are used in the analysis of epidemi- 
ological studies. The predominant technique is logistic regression, in which the 
effects of predictors are linear (or categorical) and additive on the log-odds scale. 
An important virtue of logistic regression is that the relationships identified in the 
968 T. Plate, P. Band, J. Bert and J. Grace 
data can be interpreted and explained in simple terms, such as the odds of devel- 
oping lung cancer for males who smoke between 20 and 29 cigarettes per day are 
increased by a factor of 11.5 over males who do not smoke. However, because of 
their simplicity, it is difficult to use these models to discover unanticipated complex 
relationships, i.e., non-linearities in the effect of a predictor or interactions between 
predictors. Interactions and non-linearities can of course be introduced into logistic 
regressions, but must be pre-specified, which tends to be impractical unless there 
are only a few variables or there are a priori reasons to test for particular effects. 
Neural networks have the potential to automatically discover complex relationships. 
There has been much interest in using neural networks in biomedical applications; 
witness the recent series of articles in The Lancet, e.g., Wyatt [1995] and Baxt 
[1995]. However, there are not yet sufficient comparisons or theory to come to firm 
conclusions about the utility of neural networks in biomedical data analysis. To 
date, comparison studies, e.g, those by Michie, Spiegelhalter, and Taylor [1994], 
Burke, Rosen, and Goodman [1995], and Lippmann, Lee, and ShahJan [1995], have 
had mixed results, and Jefferson et al's [1995] complaint that many successful 
applications of neural networks are not compared against standard techniques ap- 
pears to be justified. The intent of this paper is to contribute to the body of useful 
comparisons by reporting a study of various neural-network and statistical modeling 
techniques applied to an epidemiological data analysis problem. 
2 The data 
The original data set consisted of information on 15,463 subjects from a study con- 
ducted by the Division of Epidemiology and Cancer Prevention at the BC Cancer 
Agency. In this study, detailed questionnaire reported personal information, life- 
time tobacco and alcohol use, and lifetime employment history for each subject. 
The subjects were cancer patients in BC with diagnosis dates between 1983 and 
1989, as ascertained by the population-based registry at the BC Cancer Agency. 
Six different tobacco and alcohol habits were included: cigarette (c), cigar (G), and 
pipe (P) smoking, and beer (B), wine (W), and spirit drinking (s). The models re- 
ported in this paper used up to 27 predictor variables: age at first diagnosis (AGE), 
and 26 variables related to alcohol and tobacco consumption. These included four 
variables for each habit: total years of consumption (CYR etc), consumption per 
day or week (CDAY, BWK etc), years since quitting (CYQUIT etc), and a binary vari- 
able indicating any indulgence (CSMOKE, BDRINK etc). The remaining two binary 
variables indicated whether the subject ever smoked tobacco or drank alcohol. All 
the binary variables were non-linear (threshold) transforms of the other variables. 
Variables not applicable to a particular subject were zero, e.g., number of years of 
smoking for a non-smoker, or years since quitting for a smoker who did not quit. 
Of the 15,463 records, 5901 had missing information in some of the fields related 
to tobacco or alcohol use. These were not used, as there are no simple methods 
for dealing with missing data in neural networks. Of the 9,562 complete records, a 
randomly selected 3,195 were set aside for testing, leaving 6,367 complete records 
to be used in the modeling experiments. 
There were 28 binary outcomes: the 28 sites at which a subject could have cancer 
(subjects had cancers at up to 3 different sites). The number of cases for each site 
varied, e.g., for LUNGSQ (Lung Squamous) there were 694 cases among the complete 
records, for ORAL (Oral Cavity and Pharynx) 306, and for MEL (Melanoma) 464. 
All sites were modeled individually using carefully selected subjects as controls. 
This is common practice in cancer epidemiology studies, due to the difficulty of 
collecting an unbiased sample of non-cancer subjects for controls. Subjects with 
Neural Networks in Cancer Epidemiology 969 
cancers at a site suspected of being related to tobacco usage were not used as 
controls. This eliminated subjects with any sites other than COLON, RECTUM, MEL 
(Melanoma), NMSK (Non-melanoma skin), PROS (Prostate), NHL (Non-Hodgkin's 
lymphoma), and MMY (Multiple-Myeloma), and resulted in between 2959 and 3694 
controls for each site. For example, the model for LUNGSQ (lung squamous cell) 
cancer was fitted using subjects with LUNGSQ as the positive outcomes (694 cases), 
and subjects all of whose sites were among COLON, RECTUM, MEL, NMSK, PROS, NHL, 
or MMY as negative outcomes (3694 controls). 
3 Statistical methods 
A number of different types of statistical methods were used to model the data. 
These ranged from the non-flexible (logistic regression) through partially flexible 
(Generalized Additive Models or GAMs) to completely flexible (classification trees 
and neural networks). Each site was modeled independently, using the log likeli- 
hood of the data under the binomial distribution as the fitting criterion. All of the 
modeling, except for the neural networks and ridge regression, was done using the 
the S-plus statistical software package [StatSci 1995]. 
For several methods, we used Breiman's [1996] bagging technique to control over- 
fitting. To bag a model, one fits a set of models independently on bootstrap 
samples. The bagged prediction is then the average of the predictions of the models 
in the set. Breiman suggests that bagging will give superior predictions for unstable 
models (such as stepwise selection, pruned trees, and neural networks). 
Preliminary analysis revealed that the predictive power of non-flexible models could 
be improved by including non-linear transforms of some variables, namely AGESQ 
and the binary indicator variables SMOKE, DRINK, CSMOKE, etc. Flexible models 
should be able to discover useful non-linear transforms for themselves and so these 
derived variables were not included in the flexible models. In order to allow com- 
parisons to test this, one of non-flexible models (ONLYLIN-STEP) also did not use any 
of these derived variables. 
Null model: (NULL) The predictions of the null model are just the frequency of 
the outcome in the training set. 
Logistic regression: The FULL model used the full set of predictor variables, 
including a quadratic term for age: AGESQ. 
Stepwise logistic regression: A number of stepwise regressions were fitted, dif- 
fering in the set of variables considered. Outcome-balanced 10-fold cross validation 
was used to select the model size giving best generalization. The models were as 
follows: AGE-STEP (AGE and AGESQ); CYR-AGE-STEP (CYR, AGE and AGESQ); ALC- 
CYR-AGE-STEP (all alcohol variables, CYR, AGE and AGESQ); FULL-STEP (all variables 
including AGESQ); and ONLYLIN-STEP (all variables except for the derived binary 
indicator variables SMOKE, CSMOKE, etc, and only a linear AGE term). 
Ridge regression: (RIDGE) Ridge regression penalizes a logistic regression model 
by the sum of the squared parameter values in order to control overfitting. The 
evidence framework [MacKay 1995] was used to select seven shrinkage parameters: 
one for each of the six habits, and one for SMOKE, DRINK, AGE and AGESQ. 
Generalized Additive Models: GAMs [Hastie and Tibshirani 1990] fit a smooth- 
ing spline to each parameter. GAMs can model non-linearities, but not interactions. 
A stepwise procedure was used to select the degree (0,1,2, or 4) of the smoothing 
spline for each parameter. The procedure started with a model having a smoothing 
spline of degree 2 for each parameter, and stopped when the AIC statistic could 
970 T. Plate, P. Band, J. Bert and J. Grace 
not reduced any further. Two stepwise GAM models were fitted: GAM-FULL used 
the full set of variables, while GAM-CIG used the cigarette variables and 
Classification trees: [Breiman et al. 1984] The same cross-validation procedure 
as used with stepwise regression was used to select the best size for TREE, using 
the implementation in S-plus, and the function shrink.tree() for pruning. A bagged 
version with 50 replications, TREE-BAGGED, Was also used. After constructing a tree 

