Reinforcement Learning Predicts the Site 
of Plasticity for Auditory Remapping in 
the Barn Owl 
Alexandre Pouget 
alex@salk.edu 
Cedric Deffayet: Terrence J. Sejnowski? 
cedric@salk.edu terry@salk.edu 
trioward Hughes Medical Institute 
The Salk Institute 
La Jolla, CA 92037 
Department of Biology 
University of California, San Diego 
and 
Ecole Normale Superieure 
45 rue d'Ulm 
75005 Paris, France 
Abstract 
The auditory system of the barn owl contains several spatial maps. 
In young barn owls raised with optical prisms over their eyes, these 
auditory maps are shifted to stay in register with the visual map, 
suggesting that the visual input imposes a frame of reference on 
the auditory maps. However, the optic tectum, the first site of 
convergence of visual with auditory information, is not the site of 
plasticity for the shift of the auditory maps; the plasticity occurs 
instead in the inferior colliculus, which contains an auditory map 
and projects into the optic tectum. We explored a model of the owl 
remapping in which a global reinforcement signal whose delivery is 
controlled by visual foveation. A hebb learning rule gated by rein- 
forcement learned to appropriately adjust auditory maps. In addi- 
tion, reinforcement learning preferentially adjusted the weights in 
the inferior colliculus, as in the owl brain, even though the weights 
were allowed to change throughout the auditory system. This ob- 
servation raises the possibility that the site of learning does not 
have to be genetically specified, but could be determined by how 
the learning procedure interacts with the network architecture. 
126 Alexandre Pouget, Cedric Deffayet, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Optic Tectum 
  Alhistrlatum 
Inferior Colllculus 
External nucleus Forebrain Field L 
(ICx) (FBr) 
Infeor Co!!tculus 
nl ucleus 
(ICc) 
Cochlea 
Visual System 
Figure 1: Schematic view of the auditory pathways in the barn owl. 
I Introduction 
The barn owl relies primarily on sounds to localize prey [6] with an accuracy vastly 
superior to that of humans. Figure 1A illustrates some of the nuclei involved in 
processing auditory signals. The barn owl determines the location of sound sources 
by comparing the time and amplitude differences of the sound wave between the 
two ears. These two cues are combined together for the first time in the shell and 
core of the inferior colliculus (ICc) which is shown at the bottom of the diagram. 
Cells in the ICc are frequency tuned and subject to spatial aliasing. This prevents 
them from unambiguously encoding the position of objects. The first unambiguous 
auditory map is found at the next stage, in the external capsule of the inferior 
colliculus (ICx) which itself projects to the optic tectum (OT). The OT is the 
first subforebrain structure which contains a multimode spatial map in which cells 
typically have spatially congruent visual and auditory receptive fields. 
In addition, these subforebrain auditory pathways send one major collateral toward 
the forebrain via a thalamic relay. These collaterals originate in the ICc and are 
thought to convey the spatial location of objects to the forebrain [3]. Within the 
forebrain, two major structures have been involved in auditory processing: the 
archistriatum and field L. The archistriatum sends a projection to both the inferior 
colliculus and the optic tectum. 
Knudsen and Knudsen (1985) have shown that these auditory maps can adapt to 
systematic changes in the sensory input. Furthermore, the adaptation appears to 
be under the control of visual input, which imposes a frame of reference on the 
incoming auditory signals. In owls raised with optical prisms, which introduce a 
systematic shift in part of the visual field, the visual map in the optic tectum was 
identical to that found in control animals, but the auditory map in the ICx was 
shifted by the amount of visual shift introduced by the prisms. This plasticity 
ensures that the visual and auditory maps stay in spatial register during growth 
Reinforcement Learning Predicts the Site of Plasticity for Auditory Remapping 12 7 
and other perturbations to sensory mismatch. 
Since vision instructs audition, one might expect the auditory map to shift in the 
optic tectum, the first site of visual-auditory convergence. Surprisingly, Brainard 
and Knudsen (1993b) observed that the synaptic changes took place between the 
ICc and the ICx, one synapse before the site of convergence. 
These observations raise two important questions: First, how does the animal knows 
how to adapt the weights in the ICx in the absence of a visual teaching signal? 
Second, why does the change take place at this particular location and not in the 
OT where a teaching signal would be readily available? 
In a previous model [7], this shift was simulated using backpropagation to broadcast 
the error back through the layers and by constraining the weights changes to the 
projection from the ICc to ICx. There is, however, no evidence for a feedback 
projection between from the OT to the ICx that could transmit the error signal; 
nor is there evidence to exclude plasticity at other synapses in these pathways. 
In this paper, we suggest an alternative approach in which vision guides the remap- 
ping of auditory maps by controlling the delivery of a scalar reinforcement signal. 
This learning proceeds by generating random actions and increasing the probability 
of actions that are consistently reinforced [1, 5]. In addition, we show that rein- 
forcement learning correctly predicts the site of learning in the barn owl, namely 
at the ICx-ICc synapse, whereas backpropagation [8] does not favor this location 
when plasticity is allowed at every synapse. This raises a general issue: the site of 
synaptic adjustment might be imposed by the combination of the architecture and 
learning rule, without having to restrict plasticity to a particular synapse. 
2 Methods 
2.1 Network Architecture 
The network architecture of the model based on the barn owl auditory system, 
shown in figure 2A, contains two parallel pathways. The input layer was an 8x21 
map corresponding to the ICc in which units responded to frequency and interaural 
phase differences. These responses were pooled together to create auditory spatial 
maps at subsequent stages in both pathways. The rest of the network contained a 
series of similar auditory maps, which were connected topographically by receptive 
fields 13 units wide. We did not distinguish between field L and the archistriatum 
in the forebrain pathways and simply used two auditory maps, both called FBr. 
We used multiplicative (sigma-pi) units in the OT whose activities were determined 
according to: 
_ FBr FBr FBr ICx 
Yi-- Wij Yj Wjk Y 
(1) 
The multiplicative interaction between ICx and FBr activities was an important 
assumption of our model. It forced the ICx and FBr to agree on a particular 
position before the OT was activated. As a result, if the ICx-OT synapses were 
modified during learning, the ICx-FBr synapses had to be changed accordingly. 
128 Alexandre Pouget, Cedric Deffayet, Terrence J. Sejnowski 
Figure 2: Schematic diagram of weights (white blocks) in the barn owl auditory 
system. A) Diagram of the initial weights in the network. B) Pattern of weights 
after training with reinforcement learning on a prism-induced shift of four units. The 
remapping took place within the ICx and FBr. C) Pattern of weights after training 
with backpropagation. This time the ICx-OT and FBr-OT weights changed. 
Weights were clipped between 5.0 and 0.01, except for the FBr-ICx connections 
whose values were allowed to vary between 8.0 and 0.01. The minimum values were 
set to 0.01 instead of zero to prevent getting trapped in unstable local minima which 
are often associated with weights values of zero. The strong coupling between FBr 
and ICx was another important assumption of the model whose consequence will 
be discussed in the last section. 
Examples were generated by simply activating one unit in the ICc while keeping the 
others to zero, thereby simulating the pattern of activity that would be triggered by 
a single localized auditory stimulus. In all simulations, we modeled a prism-induced 
shift of four units. 
2.2 Reinforcement learning 
We used stochastic units and trained the network using reinforcement learning [1]. 
The weighted sum of the inputs, neti, passed through a sigmoid, f(x), is interpreted 
as the probability, pi, that the unit will be active: 
Pi ---- f(neti) * 0.99 + 0.01 
were the output of the unit Yi was: 
(2) 
0 with probability i -pi 
Yi - i with probability pi 
Reinforcement Learning Predicts the Site of Plasticity for Auditory Remapping 12 9 
Because of the form of the equation for Pi, all units in the network had a small 
probability (0.01) of being spontaneously active in the absence of any inputs. This 
is what allowed the network to perform a stochastic search in action space to find 
which actions were consistently associated with positive reinforcement. 
We ensured that at most one unit was active per trial by using a winner-take-M1 
competition in each layer. 
Adjustable weights in the network were updated after each training examples with 
hebb-like rule gated by reinforcement: 
(9neti 
AWij ---- eyi-=--r (4) 
OWij 
A trial consisted in choosing a random target location for auditory input (ICc) and 
the output of the OT was used to generate a head movement. The reinforcement, 
r, was then set to 1 for head movements resulting in the foveation of the stimulus 
and to-0.05 otherwise. 
2.3 Backpropagation 
For the backpropagation network, we used deterministic units with sigmoid activa- 
tion functions in which the output of a unit was given by: 
Yi = f(neti) (5) 
where neti is the weighted sum of the inputs as before. 
The chain rule was used to compute the partial derivatives of the squared error, 
E, with respect to each weights and the weights were updated afte
