Recognizing Overlapping Hand-Printed Characters by 
Centered-Object Integrated Segmentation and Recognition 
504 
Gale L. Martin* & Mosfeq Rashid 
MCC 
Austin, Texas 78759 USA 
Abstract 
This paper describes an approach, called centered object integrated seg- 
mentation and recognition (COISR), for integrating object segmenta- 
tion and recognition within a single neural network. The application 
is hand-printed character recognition. Two versions of the system are 
described. One uses a backpropagation network that scans exhaus- 
tively over a field of characters and is trained to recognize whether 
it is centered over a single character or between characters. When 
it is centered over a character, the net classflies the cfiaracter. The 
approach is tested on a dataset of hand-printed digits. Very low error 
rates are reported. The second version, COISR-SACCADE, avoids 
the need for exhaustive scans. The net is trained as before, but also 
is trained to compute ballistic 'eye' movements that enable the input 
window to jump from one character to the next. 
The common model of visual processing includes multiple, independent stages. First, 
filtering operations act on the raw image to segment or isolate and enhance to--be-re- 
cognized clumps. These clumps are normalized for factors such as size, and sometimes 
simplified further through feature extraction. The results are then fed to one or more 
classifiers. The operations prior to classification simplify the recognition task. Object 
segmentation restricts the number of features considered for classification to those as- 
sociated with a single object, and enables normalization to be applied at the individual 
object level. Without such pre-processing, recognition may be an intractable problem. 
However, a weak point of this sequential stage model is that recognition and segmenta- 
tion decisions are often inter-dependent. Not only does a correct recognition decision 
depend on first making a correct segmentation decision, but a correct segmentation 
decision often depends on first making a correct recognition decision. 
This is a particularly serious problem in character recognition applications. OCR sys- 
tems use intervening white space and related features to segment a field of characters 
into individual characters, so that classification can be accomplished one character at 
a time. This approach fails when characters touch each other or when an individual 
character is broken up by intervening white space. Some means of integrating the seg- 
mentation and recognition stages is needed. 
This paper describes an approach, called centered object integrated segmentation and rec- 
ognition (COISR), for integrating character segmentation and recognition within one 
*Also with Eastman Kodak Company 
Recognizing Overlapping Hand-Printed Characters 505 
CENTERED 
Net 
I 
I 
NET'S OUTPUT 
OVER TIME -- ..............__ .............. --- NOT CENTERED 
;'?;'i '??;' ?;'?; '?? ' 7 
- 9 
Figure 1: The COISR Exhaustive Scan Approach. 
neural network. The general approach builds on previous work in pre-segmented 
character recognition (LeCun, Boser, Denker, Henderson, Howard, Hubbard, & Jack- 
el, 1990; Martin & Pittman, 1990) and on the sliding window conception used in neural 
network speech applications, such as NETtalk (Sejnowski & Rosenberg(1986) and 
Time Delay Neural Networks (Wael, Sawai, & Shikano, 1988)?Two versions of the 
approach are describbed. In both cases, a net is trained to recognize what is centered 
in its input window as it slides along a character field. The window size is chosen to 
be large enough to include more than one character. 
1 COISR VERSION 1: EXHAUSTIVE SCAN 
As shown in Figure 1, the net is trained on an input window, and a target output vector 
representing what is in the center of the window. The top half of the figure shows the 
net's input window scanning successively across the field. Sometimes the middle of the 
window is centered on a character, and sometimes it is centered on a point between 
two characters. The target output vector consists of one node per category, and one 
node corresponding to a NOT-CENTERED condition. This latter node has a high 
target activation value when the input window is not centered over any character. A 
temporal stream of output vectors is created (shown at the bottom half of the figure) 
as the net scans the field. There is no need to explicitly segment characters, during 
training or testing, because recognition is defined as identifying what is in the center 
of the scanning window. The net learns to extract regularities in the shapes of individu- 
al characters even when those regularities occur in the context of overlapping and bro- 
ken characters. The final stage of processing involves parsing the temporal stream gen- 
erated as the net scans the field to yield an ascii string of recognized characters. 
1.1 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 
The COISR approach was tested using the National Institute of Standards and Tech- 
nology (NIST) database of hand-printed digit fields, using fields 6-30 of the form, 
which correspond to five different fields of length 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 digits each. The train- 
ing data included roughly 80,000 digits (800 forms, 20,000 fields), and came from forms 
labeled f000(Of0499, and f1500-f1799 in the dataset. The test data consisted of roughly 
20,000 digits (200 forms, 5,000 fields) and came from forms labeled f1800--f1899 and 
f2000-f2099 in the dataset. The large test set was used because considerable variations 
506 Martin and Rashid 
in test scores occurred with smaller test set sizes. The samples were scanned at a 300 
pixel/inch resolution. Each field image was preprocessed to eliminate the white space 
and box surrounding the digit field. Each field was then size normalized with respect 
to the vertical height of the digit field to a vertical height of 20 pixels. Since the input 
is size normalized to the vertical height of the field of characters, the actual number 
of characters in the constant-width input window of 36 pixels varies depending on the 
height-to-width ratio for each character. The scan rate was a 3-pixel increment across 
the field. 
A key design principle of the present approach is that highly accurate integrated seg- 
mentation and recognition requires training on both the shapes of characters and their 
positions within the input window. The field images used for training were labeled with 
the horizontal center positions of each character in the field. The human labeler simply 
pointed at the horizontal center of each digit in sequence with a mouse cursor and 
clicked on a mouse button. The horizontal position of each character was then paired 
with its category label (0--9) in a data f'fle. The labeling process is not unlike a human 
reading teacher using a pointer to indicate the position of each character as he or she 
reads aloud the sequence of characters making up the word or sentence. During testing 
this position information is not used. 
Position information about character centers is used to generate target output values 
for each possible position of the input window as it scans a field of characters. When 
the center position of a window is close to the center of a character, the target value 
of that character's output node is set at the maximum, with the target value of the 
NOT-CENTERED node set at the minimum. The activation values of all other char- 
acters' output nodes are set at the minimum. When the center position of a window 
is close to the haft-way point between two character centers, the target value of all 
character output nodes are set to the minimum and the target value of the NOT- 
CENTERED node is set to a maximum. Between these two extremes, the target val- 
ues vary linearly with distance, creating a trapezoidal function (i.e., ._.l-). 
The neural network is a 2-hidden-layer backpropagation network, with local, shared 
connections in the first hidden layer, and local connections in the second hidden layer 
(see Figure 2). The first hidden layer consists of 2016 nodes, or more specifically 18 
independent groups of 112 (16x7) nodes, with each group having local, shared connec- 
NOT CENTERED 
Output Layer 
2nd Hidden Layer 
18 1st Hidden Layer 
36 
20 
Input Layer 
Figure 2: Architecture for the COISR-Exhaustive Scan Approach. 
Recognizing Overlapping Hand-Printed Characters 507 
tions to the input layer. The local, overlapping receptive fields of size 6x8 are offset 
by 2 pixels, such that the region covered by each group of nodes spans the input layer. 
The second hidden layer consists of 180 nodes, having local, but NOT shared receptive 
fields of size 6x3. The output layer consists of 11 nodes, with each of these nodes con- 
nected to all of the nodes in the 2nd hidden layer. The net has a total of 2927 nodes 
(includes input and output nodes), and 157,068 connections. In a feedforward (non- 
learning) mode on a DEC 5000 workstation, in which the net is scanning a field of digits, 
the system processes about two digits per second, which includes image pre-processing 
and the necessary number of feedforward passes on the net. 
As the net scans horizontally, the activation values of the 11 output nodes create a trace 
as shown in Figure 1. To convert this to an ascii string corresponding to the digits in 
the field, the state of the NOT-CENTERED node is monitored continuously. When 
it's activation value falls below a threshold, a summing process begins for each of the 
other nodes, and ends when the activation value of the NOT-CENTERED node ex- 
ceeds the threshold. At this point the system decides that the input window has moved 
off of a character. The system then classflies the character on the basis of which output 
node has the highest summed activation for the position just passed over. 
1.2 GENERALIZATION PERFORMANCE 
As shown in Figure 3, the COISR technique achieves very low field-ba
