A recurrent model of the interaction between 
Prefrontal and Inferotemporal cortex in delay 
tasks 
ALFONSO RENART, NISTOR PARGA 
Departamento de F(sica Te6rica 
Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid 
Canto Blanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain 
http://www. ft.uam.es/neurocienciaJGRUPO/grupo_english.html 
and 
EDMUND T. ROLLS 
Oxford University 
Department of Experimental Psychology 
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3 UD, England 
Abstract 
A very simple model of two reciprocally connected attractor neural net- 
works is studied analytically in situations similar to those encountered 
in delay match-to-sample tasks with intervening stimuli and in tasks of 
memory guided attention. The model qualitatively reproduces many of 
the experimental data on these types of tasks and provides a framework 
for the understanding of the experimental observations in the context of 
the attractor neural network scenario. 
1 Introduction 
Working memory is usually defined as the capability to actively hold information in mem- 
ory for short periods of time. In primates, visual working memory is usually studied in 
experiments in which, after the presentation of a given visual stimulus, the monkey has 
to withhold its response during a certain delay period in which no specific visual stimulus 
is shown. After the delay, another stimulus is presented and the monkey has to make a 
response which depends on the interaction between the two stimuli. In order to bridge the 
temporal gap between the stimuli, the first one has to be held in memory during the delay. 
Electrophysiological recordings in primates during the performance of this type of tasks 
has revealed that some populations of neurons in different brain areas such as prefrontal 
(PF), inferotemporal (IT) or posterior parietal (PP) cortex, maintain approximately con- 
stant firing rates during the delay periods (for a review see [ 1]) and this delay activity states 
have been postulated as the internal representations of the stimuli provoking them [2]. Al- 
though up to now most of the modeling effort regarding the operation of networks able to 
support stable delay activity states has been put in the study of uni-modular (homogeneous) 
networks, there is evidence that in order for the monkey to solve the tasks satisfactorily, the 
interaction of several different neural structures is needed. A number of studies of delay 
match-to-sample tasks with intervening stimuli in primates performed by Desimone and 
172 A. Renart, N. Parga and E. T. Rolls 
colleagues has revealed that although IT cortex supports delay activity states and shows 
memory related effects (differential responses to the same, fixed stimulus depending on its 
status on the trial, e.g. whether it matches or not the sample), it cannot, by itself, provide 
the information necessary to solve the task, as the delay activity states elicited by each of 
the stimuli in a sequence are disrupted by the input information associated with each new 
stimulus presented [3, 4, 5]. Another structure is therefore needed to store the information 
for the whole duration of the trial. PF cortex is a candidate, since it shows selective delay 
activity maintained through entire trials even with intervening stimuli [6]. A series of par- 
allel experiments by the same group on memory guided attention [7, 8] have also shown 
differential firing of IT neurons in response to the same visual stimulus shown after a delay 
(an array of figures), depending on previous information shown before the delay (one of 
the figures in the array working as a target stimulus). This evidence suggests a distributed 
memory system as the proper scenario to study working memory tasks as those described 
above. Taking into account that both IT and PF cortex are known to be able to support 
delay activity states, and that they are bi-directionally connected, in this paper we propose 
a simple model consisting of two reciprocally connected attractor neural networks to be 
identified with IT and PF cortex. Despite its simplicity, the model is able to qualitatively 
reproduce the behavior of IT and PF cortex during delay match-to-sample tasks with in- 
tervening stimuli, the behavior of IT cells during memory guided attention tasks, and to 
provide an unified picture of these experimental data in the context of associative memory 
and attractor neural networks. 
2 Model and dynamics 
The model network consists of a large number of (excitatory) neurons arranged in two 
modules. Following [9, 10], each neuron is assumed to be a dynamical element which 
transforms an incoming afferent current into an output spike rate according to a given 
transduction function. A given afferent current Iai to neuron i (i = 1,..., N) in module a 
(a - IT, PF) decays with a characteristic time constant T but increases proportionally to 
the spike rates vbj of the rest of the neurons in the network (both from inside and outside 
its module) connected to it, the contribution of each presynaptic neuron, e.g. neuron j from 
module b, being proportional to the synaptic efficacy Jf between the two. This can be 
expressed through the following equation 
/rai(t) ri(t) 
dt T 
h(eXt) 
An external current --ai from outside the network, representing the stimuli, can also 
be imposed on every neuron. Selective stimuli are modeled as proportional to the stored 
patterns, i.e. hU? 't) - h u where h, is the intensity of the external current to module a. 
'-a -- aai' 
The transduction function of the neurons transforming currents into rates has been chosen 
as a threshold hyperbolic tangent of gain G and threshold 0. 
The synaptic efficacies between the neurons of each module and between the neurons in 
different modules are respectively [ 1 l, 12] 
P 
Jo E(r/a u/-f) (r/aUJ-f) ij ; a=IT, PF 
j;,a): f(1- f)Nt =l 
(2) 
P 
 E (TIa5 -- f) (TIj -- f) V i, j ; a  b 
Jf') = f(1 - f)Nt/--1 
(3) 
Recurrent Model of lT-PF Interactions in Delay Tasks 173 
The intra-modular connections express the learning of P binary patterns {r/,U/= 0, 1, tt = 
1,..., P} by each module, each of them signaling which neurons are active in each of 
the sustained activity configurations. Each variable r/,Ui is supposed to take the values 1 
and 0 with probabilities f and (1 - f) respectively, independently across neurons and 
across patterns. The inter-modular connections reflect the temporal associations between 
the sustained activity states of each module. In this way, every stored pattern tt in the IT 
module has an associated pattern in the PF module which is labelled by the same index. 
The normalization constant Nt = N(Jo q- g) has been chosen so that the sum of the 
magnitudes of the inter- and the intra-modular connections remains constant and equal to 
1 while their relative values are varied. When this constraint is imposed the strength of 
the connections can be expressed in terms of a single independent parameter g measuring 
the relative intensity of the inter- vs. the intra-modular connections (Jo can be set equal 
to I everywhere). We will limit our study to the case where the number of stored patterns 
per module P does not increase proportionally to the size of the modules N since a large 
number of stored patterns does not seem necessary to describe the phenomenology of the 
delay match-to-sample experiments. 
Since the number of neurons in a typical network one may be interested in is very large, 
e.g.  10 5 - 10 6, the analytical treatment of the set of coupled differential equations (1) 
becomes intractable. On the other hand, when the number of neurons is large, a reliable de- 
scription of the asymptotic solutions of these equations can be found using the techniques 
of statistical mechanics [13, 9]. In this framework, instead of characterizing the states 
of the system by the state of every neuron, this characterization is performed in terms of 
macroscopic quantities called order parameters which measure and quantify some global 
properties of the network as a whole. The relevant order parameters appearing in the de- 
scription of our system are the overlaps of the state of each module with each of the stored 
patterns m, defined as: 
1 
= << f).i >>. , (4) 
i 
where the symbol <<... >>v stands for an average over the stored patterns. 
Using the free energy per neuron of the system at zero temperature r (which we do not 
write explicitly to reduce the technicalities to a minimum) we have modeled the experi- 
ments by giving the order parameters the following dynamics: 
TOrn.U = OY (5) 
Ot Ore.  
This dynamics ensures that the stationary solutions, corresponding to the values of the 
order parameters at the attractors, correspond also to minima of the free energy, and that, 
as the system evolves, the free energy is always minimized through its gradient. The time 
constant of the macroscopic dynamics is a free parameter which has been chosen equal to 
the time constant of the individual neurons, reflecting the assumption that neurons operate 
in parallel. Its value has been set to 7- = 10 ms. Equations (5) have been solved by a 
simple discretizing procedure (first order Runge-Kutta method). 
Since not all neurons in the network receive the same inputs, not all of them behave in 
the same way, i.e. have the same firing rates. In fact, the neurons in each of the module 
can be split into different sub-populations according to their state of activity in each of 
the stored patterns. The mean firing rate of the neurons in each sub-population depends 
on the particular state realized by the network (characterized by the values of the order 
parameters). Associated to each pattern there are two larger sub-populations, to be denoted 
as foreground (all active neurons) and background (all inactive neurons) of that pattern. 
174 A. Renart, N. Parga and E. T. Rolls 
The overlap with a given pattern can be expressed as the difference between the mean firing 
rate of the neurons in its foreground and its backgro
