ICEG Morphology Classification using an 
Analogue VLSI Neural Network 
Richard Coggins, Marwan Jabri, Barry Flower and Stephen Pickard 
Systems Engineering and Design Automation Laboratory 
Department of Electrical Engineering J03, 
University of Sydney, 2006, Australia. 
Email: richardc@sedal.su.oz.au 
Abstract 
An analogue VLSI neural network has been designed and tested 
to perform cardiac morphology classification tasks. Analogue tech- 
niques were chosen to meet the strict power and area requirements 
of an Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) system. The ro- 
bustness of the neural network architecture reduces the impact of 
noise, drift and offsets inherent in analogue approaches. The net- 
work is a 10:6:3 multi-layer perceptron with on chip digital weight 
storage, a bucket brigade input to feed the Intracardiac Electro- 
gram (ICEG) to the network and has a winner take all circuit 
at the output. The network was trained in loop and included a 
commercial ICD in the signal processing path. The system has suc- 
cessfully distinguished arrhythmia for different patients with better 
than 90% true positive and true negative detections for dangerous 
rhythms which cannot be detected by present ICDs. The chip was 
implemented in 1.2urn CMOS and consumes less than 200nW max- 
imum average power in an area of 2.2 x 2.2ram 2. 
I INTRODUCTION 
To the present time, most ICDs have used timing information from ventricular 
leads only to classify rhythms which has meant some dangerous rhythms can not 
be distinguished from safe ones, limiting the use of the device. Even two lead 
732 Richard Coggins, Marwan Jabri, Barry Flower, Stephen Pickard 
4.5O 
4.00 
3.50 
3.00 
2.5O 
00 
1.50 
1.00 
O.5O 
0.00 
s 
5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 
Figure 1: The Morphology of ST and VT retrograde 1:1. 
atrial/ventricular systems fail to distinguish some rhythms when timing informa- 
tion alone is used [Leong and Jabri, 1992]. A case in point is the separation of Si- 
nus Tachycardia (ST) from Ventricular Tachycardia with 1:1 retrograde conduction. 
ST is a safe arrhythmia which may occur during vigorous exercise and is charac- 
terised by a heart rate of approximately 120 beats/minute. VT retrograde 1:1 also 
occurs at the same low rate but can be a potentially fatal condition. False negative 
detections can cause serious heart muscle injury while false positive detections de- 
plete the batteries, cause patient suffering and may lead to costly transplantation 
of the device. Figure i shows however, the way in which the morphology changes 
on the ventricular lead for these rhythms. Note, that the morphology change is 
predominantly in the QRS complex where the letters QRS are the conventional 
labels for the different points in the conduction cycle during which the heart is 
actually pumping blood. 
For a number of years, researchers have studied template matching schemes in order 
to try and detect such morphology changes. However, techniques such as correlation 
waveform analysis [Lin et. al., 1988], though quite successful are too computation- 
ally intensive to meet power requirements. In this paper, we demonstrate that 
an analogue VLSI neural network can detect such morphology changes while still 
meeting the strict power and area requirements of an implantable system. The 
advantages of an analogue approach are born out when one considers that an en- 
ergy efficient analogue to digital converter such as [ Kusumoto et. al., 1993] uses 
1.5nJ per conversion implying 375nW power consumption for analogue to digital 
conversion of the ICEG alone. Hence, the integration of a bucket brigade device and 
analogue neural network provides a very efficient way of interfacing to the analogue 
domain. Further, since the network is trained in loop with the ICD in real time, 
the effects of device offsets, noise, QRS detection jitter and signal distortion in the 
analogue circuits are largely alleviated. 
The next section discusses the chip circuit designs. Section 3 describes the method 
ICEG Morphology Classification Using an Analogue VLSI Neural Network 733 
Bucket Brigade 
tOxG Synapse Array 
Column 
.4ddreaB netorm 
114JrQri8 
Figure 2' Floor Plan and Photomicrograph of the chip 
used to train the network for the morphology classification task. Section 4 describes 
the classifier performance on seven patients with arrhythmia which can not be 
distinguished using the heart rate only. Section 5 summarises the results, remaining 
problems and future directions for the work. 
2 ARCHITECTURE 
The neural network chip consists of a 10:6:3 multilayer perceptron, an input bucket 
brigade device (BBD) and a winner take all (WTA) circuit at the output. A floor 
plan and photomicrograph of the chip appears in figure 2. The BBD samples the 
incoming ICEG at a rate of 250Hz. For three class problems, the winner take all 
circuit converts the winning class to a digital signal. For the two class problem 
considered in this paper, a simple thresholding function suffices. The following 
subsections briefly describe the functional elements of the chip. The circuit diagrams 
for the chip building blocks appear in figure 3. 
2.1 BUCKET BRIGADE DEVICE 
One stage of the bucket brigade circuit is shown in figure 3. The BBD uses a 
two phase clock to shift charge from cell to cell and is based on a design by 
Leong [Leong, 1992]. The BBD operates by transferring charge deficits from S 
to D in each of the cells. PHI1 and PHI2 are two phase non-overlapping clocks. 
The cell is buffered from the synapse array to maintain high charge transfer effi- 
ciency. A sample and hold facility is provided to store the input on the gates of the 
synapses. The BBD clocks are generated off chip and are controlled by the QRS 
complex detector in the ICD. 
2.2 SYNAPSE 
This synapse has been used on a number of neural network chips previously. 
e.g. [Coggins et. al., 1994]. The synapse has five bits plus sign weight storage which 
734 Richard Coggins, Marwan Jabri, Barry Flower, Stephen Pickard 
8AIDR 
NEURON 
S D 
BUCKET BRIGADE 
Figure 3: Neuron, Bucket Brigade and Synapse Circuit Diagrams. 
sets the bias to a differential pair which performs the multiplication. The bias ref- 
erences for the weights are derived from a weighted current source in the corner of 
the chip. A four quadrant multiplication is achieved by the four switches at the top 
of the differential pair. 
2.3 NEURON 
Due to the low power requirements, the bias currents of the synapse arrays are of 
the order of hundreds of nano amps, hence the neurons must provide an effective 
resistance of many mega ohms to feed the next synapse layer while also providing 
gain control. Without special high resistance polysilicon, simple resistive neurons 
use prohibitive area. However, for larger networks with fan-in much greater than 
ten, an additional problem of common mode cancellation is encountered. That is, 
as the fan-in increases, a larger common mode range is required or a cancellation 
scheme using common mode feedback is needed. 
The neuron of figure 3 implements such a cancellation scheme. The mirrors M0/M2 
and M1/M3 divide the input current and facilitate the sum at the drain of M7. 
M7/M8 mirrors the sum so that it may be split into two equal currents by the 
mirrors formed by M4, M5 and M6 which are then subtracted from the input 
currents. Thus, the differential voltage Vp - Vm is a function of the transistor 
transconductances, the common mode input current and the feedback factor. The 
gain of the neuron can be controlled by varying the width to length ratio of the 
mirror transistors M0 and M1. The implementation in this case allows seven gain 
combinations, using a three bit RAM cell to store the gain. 
ICEG Morphology Classification Using an Analogue VLSI Neural Network 735 
486 PO 
Running MUME 
Implantable 
Gm'dioveror 
Defibrlllator 
Level sl'ift and 
and efial 
Gain Cona'ol 
weight bus 
Netw'k Analolue oulput 
Neural 
Network 
Chip 
Figure 4: Block Diagram of the Training and Testing System. 
The importance of a common mode cancellation scheme for large networks can 
be seen when compared to the straight forward approach of resistive or switched 
capacitor neurons. This may be illustrated by considering the energy usage of 
the two approaches. Firstly, we need to define the required gain of the neuron 
as a function of its fan-in. If we assume that useful inputs to the network are 
mostly sparse, i.e. with a small fraction of non-zero values, then the gain is largely 
independent of the fan-in, yet the common mode signal increases linearly with fan- 
in. For the case of a neuron which does not cancel the common mode, the power 
supply voltage must be increased to accommodate the common mode signal, thus 
leading to a quadratic increase in energy use with fan-in. A common mode cancelling 
neuron on the other hand, suffers only a linear increase in energy use with fan-in 
since extra voltage range is not required and the increased energy use arises only 
due to the linear increase in common mode current. 
3 TRAINING SYSTEM 
The system used to train and test the neural network is shown in figure 4. Control 
of training and testing takes place on the PC. The PC uses a PC-LAB card to 
provide analogue and digital I/O. The PC plays the ICEG signal to the input of 
the commercial ICD in real time. Note, that the PC is only required for initially 
training the network and in this case as a source of the heart signal. The commercial 
ICD performs the function of QRS complex detection using analogue circuits. The 
QRS complex detection signal is then used to freeze the BBD clocks of the chip, so 
that a classification can take place. 
When training, a number of examples of the arrhythmia to be classified are selected 
from a single patient data base recorded during an electrophysiological study and 
previously classified by a cardiologist. Since most of the morphological informatio
