Spectroscopic Detection of Cervical 
Pre-Cancer through Radial Basis 
Function Networks 
Kagan Turner 
kagan@pine.ece.utexas.edu 
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engr. 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Nirmala Ramanujam 
nimmi@ccwf. cc.utexas.edu 
Biomedical Engineering Program 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Rebecca Richards-Korturn 
kortum@mail.utexas.edu 
Biomedical Engineering Program 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Joydeep Ghosh 
ghosh@ece.utexas.edu 
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engr. 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Abstract 
The mortality related to cervical cancer can be substantially re- 
duced through early detection and treatment. However, cur- 
rent detection techniques, such as Pap smear and colposcopy, 
fail to achieve a concurrently high sensitivity and specificity. In 
vivo fluorescence spectroscopy is a technique which quickly, non- 
invasively and quantitatively probes the biochemical and morpho- 
logical changes that occur in pre-cancerous tissue. RBF ensemble 
algorithms based on such spectra provide automated, and near real- 
time implementation of pre-cancer detection in the hands of non- 
experts. The results are more reliable, direct and accurate than 
those achieved by either human experts or multivariate statistical 
algorithms. 
I Introduction 
Cervical carcinoma is the second most common cancer in women worldwide, ex- 
ceeded only by breast cancer (Ramanujam et al., 1996). The mortality related to 
cervical cancer can be reduced if this disease is detected at the pre-cancerous state, 
known as squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL). Currently, a Pap smear is used to 
982 K. Tumer, N. Ramanujam, R. Richards-Kortum and J. Ghosh 
screen for cervical cancer (Kurman et al., 1994). In a Pap test, a large number of 
cells obtained by scraping the cervical epithelium are smeared onto a slide which 
is then fixed and stained for cytologic examination. The Pap smear is unable to 
achieve a concurrently high sensitivity  and high specificity 2 due to both sampling 
and reading errors (Fahey et al., 1995). Furthermore, reading Pap smears is ex- 
tremely labor intensive and requires highly trained professionals. A patient with 
a Pap smear interpreted as indicating the presence of SIL is followed up by a di- 
agnostic procedure called colposcopy. Since this procedure involves biopsy, which 
requires histologic evaluation, diagnosis is not immediate. 
In vivo fluorescence spectroscopy is a technique which has the capability to quickly, 
non-invasively and quantitatively probe the biochemical and morphological changes 
that occur as tissue becomes neoplastic. The measured spectral information can be 
correlated to tissue histo-pathology, the current gold standard to develop clinically 
effective screening and diagnostic algorithms. These mathematical algorithms can 
be implemented in software thereby, enabling automated, fast, non-invasive and 
accurate pre-cancer screening and diagnosis in hands of non-experts. 
A screening and diagnostic technique for human cervical pre-cancer based on laser 
induced fluorescence spectroscopy has been developed recently (Ramanujam et al., 
1996). Screening and diagnosis was achieved using a multivariate statistical algo- 
rithm (MSA) based on principal component analysis and logistic discrimination of 
tissue spectra acquired in vivo. Furthermore, we designed Radial Basis Function 
(RBF) network ensembles to improve the accuracy of the multivariate statistical 
algorithm, and to simplify the decision making process. Section 2 presents the data 
collection/processing techniques. In Section 3, we discuss the MSA, and describe 
the neural network based methods. Section 4 contains the experimental results and 
compares the neural network results to both the results of the MSA and to current 
clinical detection methods. A discussion of the results is given in Section 5. 
2 Data Collection and Processing 
A portable fiuorimeter consisting of two nitrogen pumped-dye lasers, a fiber-optic 
probe and a polychromator coupled to an intensified diode array controlled by an 
optical multi-channel analyzer was utilized to measure fluorescence spectra from the 
cervix in vivo at three excitation wavelengths: 337, 380 and 460 nm (Ramanujam 
et al., 1996). Tissue biopsies were obtained only from abnormal sites identified by 
colposcopy and subsequently analyzed by the probe to comply with routine patient 
care procedure. Hemotoxylin and eosin stained sections of each biopsy specimen 
were evaluated by a panel of four board certified pathologists and a consensus 
diagnosis was established using the Bethesda classification system. Samples were 
classified as normal squamous (NS), normal columnar (NC), low grade (LG) SIL 
and high grade (HG) SIL. Table I provides the number of samples in the training 
(calibration) and test sets. Based on this data set, a clinically useful algorithm 
needs to discriminate SILs from the normal tissue types. 
Figure 1 illustrates average fluorescence spectra per site acquired from cervical sites 
at 337 nm excitation from a typical patient. Evaluation of the spectra at 337 nm ex- 
Sensitivity is the correct classification percentage on the pre-cancerous tissue samples. 
2Specificity is the correct classification percentage on normal tissue samples. 
Spectroscopic Detection of Cervical Pre-cancer through RBF Networks 983 
Table 1: Histo-pathologic classification of samples. 
Histo-pathology Training Set Test Set 
Normal 107 (SN: 94; SC: 13) 108 (SN: 94; SC: 14) 
SIL 58 (LG: 23; HG: 35) 59 (LG: 24; HG: 35) 
citation highlights one of the classification difficulties, namely that the fluorescence 
intensity of SILs (LG and HG) is less than that of the corresponding normal squa- 
mous tissue and greater than that of the corresponding normal columnar tissue over 
the entire emission spectrum s . Fluorescence spectra at all three excitation wave- 
lengths comprise of a total of 161 excitation-emission wavelengths pairs. However, 
there is a significant cost penalty for using all 161 values. To alleviate this concern, 
a more cost-effective fluorescence imaging system was developed, using component 
loadings calculated from principal component analysis. Thus, the number of re- 
quired fluorescence excitation-emission wavelength pairs were reduced from 161 to 
13 with a minimal drop in classification accuracy (Ramanujam et al., 1996). 
0.50 
3 
o 
0.40 
NC 
NS 
0.30 ...... HG 
-- G 
0.20 
0.10 
0.00 ' 
300.0 400.0 500.0 600.0 
Wavelength (nm) 
Figure 1: Fluorecsence spectra from a typical patient at 337 nm excitation. 
700.0 
Algorithm Development 
3.1 Multivariate Statistical Algorithms 
The multivariate statistical algorithm development described in (Ramanujam et al., 
1996) consists of the following five steps: (1) pre-processing to reduce inter-patient 
and intra-patient variation of spectra from a tissue type, (2) dimension reduction 
of the pre-processed tissue spectra using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), 
(3) selection of diagnostically relevant principal components, (4) development of a 
classification algorithm based on logistic discrimination, and finally (5) retrospective 
and prospective evaluation of the algorithm 's accuracy on a training (calibration) 
and test (prediction) set, respectively. Discrimination between SILs and the two 
normal tissue types could not be achieved effectively using MSA. Therefore two 
SSpectral features observed in Figure 1 are representative of those measured at 380 nra 
and 460 nm excitation (not shown here). 
984 K. Tumer, N. Ramanujam, R. Richards-Kortum and J. Ghosh 
constituent algorithms were developed: algorithm (1), to discriminate between SILs 
and normal squamous tissues, and algorithm (2), to discriminate between SILs and 
normal columnar tissues (Ramanujam et al., 1996). 
3.2 Algorithms based on Neural Networks 
The second stage of algorithm development consists of evaluating the applicability of 
neural networks to this problem. Initially, both Multi-Layered Perceptrons (MLPs) 
and Radial Basis function (RBF) networks were considered. However, MLPs failed 
to improve upon the MSA results for both algorithms (1) and (2), and frequently 
converged to spurious solutions. Therefore, our study focuses on RBF networks and 
RBF network ensembles. 
Radial Basis Function Networks: The first step in applying RBF networks to 
this problem consisted of retracing the two-step process outlined for the multivariate 
statistical algorithm. For constituent algorithm (1) the kernels were initialized using 
a k-means clustering algorithm on the training set containing NS tissue samples 
and SILs. The RBF networks had 10 kernels, whose locations and spreads were 
adjusted during training. For constituent algorithm (2), we selected 10 kernels, half 
of which were fixed to patterns from the columnar normal class, while the other half 
were initialized using a k-means algorithm. Neither the kernel locations nor their 
spreads were adjusted during training. This process was adopted to rectify the large 
discrepancy between the samples from each category (13 for columnar normal vs. 
58 for SILs). For each algorithm, the training time was estimated by maximizing 
the performance on one validation set. Once the stopping time was established, 20 
cases were run for each algorithm 4. 
Linear and Order statistics Combiners: There were significant variations 
among different runs of the RBF networks for all three algorithms. Therefore, 
selecting the best classifier was not the ideal choice. First, the definition of 
best depends on the selection of the validation set, making it difficult to ascertain 
whether one network will outperform all others given a different test set, as the val- 
idation sets are small. Second, selecting only one classifier discards a large amount 
of potentially relevant information. In order to use all the available data, and to 
increase both the performance and the reliabil
