Toward a Single-Cell Account for 
Binocular Disparity Tuning: An Energy 
Model May be Hiding in Your Dendrites 
Bartlett W. Mel 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
University of Southern California, MC 1451 
Los Angeles, CA 90089 
mel@quake.usc.edu 
Daniel L. Ruderman 
The Salk Institute 
10010 N. Torrey Pines Road 
La Jolla, CA 92037 
ruderman@salk.edu 
Kevin A. Archie 
Neuroscience Program 
University of Southern California 
Los Angeles, CA 90089 
karchie@quake.usc.edu 
Abstract 
Hubel and Wiesel (1962) proposed that complex cells in visual cor- 
tex are driven by a pool of simple cells with the same preferred 
orientation but different spatial phases. However, a wide variety of 
experimental results over the past two decades have challenged the 
pure hierarchical model, primarily by demonstrating that many 
complex cells receive monosynaptic input from unoriented LGN 
cells, or do not depend on simple cell input. We recently showed us- 
ing a detailed biophysical model that nonlinear interactions among 
synaptic inputs to an excitable dendritic tree could provide the non- 
linear subunit computations that underlie complex cell responses 
(Mel, Ruderman, & Archie, 1997). This work extends the result 
to the case of complex cell binocular disparity tuning, by demon- 
strating in an isolated model pyramidal cell (1) disparity tuning 
at a resolution much finer than the the overall dimensions of the 
cell's receptive field, and (2) systematically shifted optimal dispar- 
ity values for rivalrous pairs of light and dark bars--both in good 
agreement with published reports (Ohzawa, DeAngelis,  Free- 
man, 1997). Our results reemphasize the potential importance of 
intradendritic computation for binocular visual processing in par- 
ticular, and for cortical neurophysiology in general. 
Single- Cell Account for Binocular Disparity Tuning 
Introduction 
209 
Binocular disparity is a powerful cue for depth in vision. The neurophysiological 
basis for binocular disparity processing has been of interest for decades, spawned 
by the early studies of Hubel and Wiesel (1962) showing neurons in primary visual 
cortex which could be driven by both eyes. Early qualitative models for disparity 
tuning held that a binocularly driven neuron could represent a particular disparity 
(zero, near, or far) via a relative shift of receptive field (RF) centers in the right 
and left eyes. According to this model, a binocular cell fires maximally when an 
optimal stimulus, e.g. an edge of a particular orientation, is simultaneously centered 
in the left and right eye receptive fields, corresponding to a stimulus at a specific 
depth relative to the fixation point. An account of this kind is most relevant to the 
case of a cortical simple cell, whose phase-sensitivity enforces a preference for a 
particular absolute location and contrast polarity of a stimulus within its monocular 
receptive fields. 
This global receptive field shift account leads to a conceptual puzzle, however, when 
binocular complex cell receptive fields are considered instead, since a complex cell 
can respond to an oriented feature nearly independent of position within its monoc- 
ulax receptive field. Since complex cell receptive field diameters in the cat lie in the 
range of 1-3 degrees, the excessive play in their monocular receptive fields would 
seem to render complex cells incapable of signaling disparity on the much finer scale 
needed for depth perception (measured in minutes). 
Intriguingly, various authors have reported that a substantial fraction of complex 
cells in cat visual cortex are in fact tuned to left-right disparities much finer than 
that suggested by the size of the monocular RF's. For such cells, a stimulus deliv- 
ered at the proper disparity, regardless of absolute position in either eye, produces 
a neural response in excess of that predicted by the sum of the monocular responses 
(Pettigrew, Nikara, & Bishop, 1968; Ohzawa, DeAngelis, & Freeman, 1990; Ohzawa 
et al., 1997). Binocular responses of this type suggest that for these cells, the left 
and right RF's are combined via a correlation operation rather than a simple sum 
(Nishihara & Poggio, 1984; Koch & Poggio, 1987). This computation has also been 
formalized in terms of an energy model (Ohzawa et al., 1990, 1997), building 
on the earlier use of energy models to account for complex cell orientation tuning 
(Pollen & Ronner, 1983) and direction selectivity (Adelson & Bergen, 1985). In 
an energy model for binocular disparity tuning, sums of linear Gabor filter out- 
puts representing left and right receptive fields are squared to produce the crucial 
multiplicative cross terms (Ohzawa et al., 1990, 1997). 
Our previous biophysical modeling work has shown that the dendritic tree of a cor- 
tical pyramidal cells is well suited to support an approximative high-dimensional 
quadratic input-output relation, where the second-order multiplicative cross terms 
arise from local interactions among synaptic inputs carried out in quasi-isolated 
dendritic subunits (Mel, 1992b, 1992a, 1993). We recently applied these ideas 
to show that the position-invariant orientation tuning of a monocular complex cell 
could be computed within the dendrites of a single cortical cell, based exclusively 
upon excitatory inputs from a uniform, overlapping population of unoriented ON 
and OFF cells (Mel et al., 1997). Given the similarity of the energy formulations 
previously proposed to account for orientation tuning and binocular disparity tun- 
ing, we hypothesized that a similar type of dendritic subunit computation could 
underlie disparity tuning in a binocularly driven complex cell. 
210 B. W. Mel, D. L. Ruderman and K. A. Archie 
Parameter Value 
Rm 10kFtcm 2 
Ra 200Ftcm 
Cm 1.0pF/cm 2 
Vrest -70 mV 
Compartments 615 
Somatic Na, DR 0.20, 0.12 S/cm 2 
Dendritic a, 0Drt 0.05, 0.03 S/cm 2 
Input frequency 0 - 100 Hz 
AMPA 0.027 nS - 0.295 nS 
TAMPA (on, off) 0.5 ms, 3 ms 
NMDA 0.27 nS - 2.95 nS 
TNMDA (on, off) 0.5 ms, 50 ms 
Esyn 0 mV 
Table 1: Biophysical simulation parameters. Details of HH channel implementa- 
tion are given elsewhere (Mel, 1993); original HH channel implementation cour- 
tesy Ojvind Bernander and Rodney Douglas. In order that local EPSP size be 
held approximately constant across the dendritic arbor, peak synaptic conduc- 
tance at dendritic location x was approximately scaled to the local input resis- 
tance (inversely), given by syn(X) -- C/lin(X), where c was a constant, and 
/in(X) = max(Rin(X), 200MFt). Input resistance Rin(X) was measured for a pas- 
sive cell. Thus syn Was identical for all dendritic sites with input resistance below 
200Mft, and was given by the larger conductance value shown; roughly 50% of the 
tree fell within a factor of 2 of this value. Peak conductances at the finest distal tips 
were smaller by roughly a factor of 10 (smaller number shown). Somatic input resis- 
tance was near 24Mft. The peak synaptic conductance values used were such that 
the ratio of steady state current injection through NMDA vs. AMPA channels was 
1.2 + 0.4. Both AMPA and NMDA-type synaptic conductances were modeled using 
the kinetic scheme of Destexhe et al. (1994); synaptic activation and inactivation 
time constants are shown for each. 
2 Methods 
Compartmental simulations of a pyramidal cell from cat visual cortex (morphol- 
ogy courtesy of Rodney Douglas and Kevan Martin) were carried out in NEURON 
(Hines, 1989); simulatior, parameters are summarized in Table 1. The soma and den- 
dritic membrane contained Hodgkin-Huxley-type (HH) voltage-dependent sodium 
and potassium channels. Following evidence for higher spike thresholds and decre- 
mental propagation in dendrites (Stuart &; Sakmann, 1994), HH channel density was 
set to a uniform, 4-fold lower value in the dendritic membrane relative to that of the 
cell body. Excitatory synapses from LGN cells included both NMDA and AMPA- 
type synaptic conductances. Since the cell was considered to be isolated from the 
cortical network, inhibitory input was not modeled. Cortical cell responses were 
reported as average spike rate recorded at the cell body over the 500 ms stimulus 
period, excluding the 50 ms initial transient. 
The binocular LGN consisted of two copies of the monocular LGN model used 
previously (Mel et al., 1997), each consisting of a superimposed pair of 64x64 ON 
and OFF subfields. LGN cells were modeled as linear, half-rectified center-surround 
filters with centers 7 pixels in width. We randomly subsampled the left and right 
LGN arrays by a factor of 16 to yield 1,024 total LGN inputs to the pyramidal cell. 
A Single-Cell Account for Binocular Disparity Tuning 211 
A developmental principle was used to determine the spatial arrangement of these 
1,024 synaptic contacts onto the dendritic branches of the cortical cell, as follows. 
A virtual stimulus ensemble was defined for the cell, consisting of the complete set 
of single vertical light or dark bars presented binocularly at zero-disparity within 
the cell's receptive field. Within this ensemble, strong pairwise correlations existed 
among cells falling into vertically aligned groups of the same (ON or OFF) type, 
and cells in the vertical column at zero horizontal disparity in the other eye. These 
binocular cohorts of highly correlated LGN cells were labeled mutual friends. 
Progressing through the dendritic tree in depth first order, a randomly chosen LGN 
cell was assigned to the first dendritic site. A randomly chosen friend of hers 
was assigned to the second site, the third site was assigned to a friend of the site 2 
input, etc., until all friends in the available subsample were assigned (4 from each 
eye, on average). If the friends of the connection at site i were exhausted, a new 
LGN cell was chosen at random for site i + 1. In earlier work, this type of synaptic 
arrangement was shown to be the outcome of a Hebb-ty
