Predicting the Risk of Complications in Coronary 
Artery Bypass Operations using Neural Networks 
Richard P. Lippmann, Linda Kukolich 
MIT Lincoln Laboratory 
244 Wood Street 
Lexington, MA 02173-0073 
Dr. David Shahian 
Lahey Clinic 
Burlington, MA 01805 
Abstract 
Experiments demonstrated that sigmoid multilayer perceptron (MLP) 
networks provide slightly better risk prediction than conventional 
logistic regression when used to predict the risk of death, stroke, and 
renal failure on 1257 patients who underwent coronary artery bypass 
operations at the Lahey Clinic. MLP networks with no hidden layer and 
networks with one hidden layer were trained using stochastic gradient 
descent with early stopping. MLP networks and logistic regression used 
the same input features and were evaluated using bootstrap sampling 
with 50 replications. ROC areas for predicting mortality using 
preoperative input features were 70.5% for logistic regression and 
76.0% for MLP networks. Regularization provided by early stopping 
was an important component of improved performance. A simplified 
approach to generating confidence intervals for MLP risk predictions 
using an auxiliary confidence MLP was developed. The confidence 
MLP is trained to reproduce confidence intervals that were generated 
during training using the outputs of 50 MLP networks trained with 
different bootstrap samples. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
In 1992 there were roughly 300,000 coronary artery bypass operations performed in the 
United States at a cost of roughly $44,000 per operation. The $13.2 billion total cost of 
these operations is a significant fraction of health care spending in the United States. This 
has led to recent interest in comparing the quality of cardiac surgery across hospitals using 
risk-adjusted procedures and large patient populations. It has also led to interest in better 
assessing risks for individual patients and in obtaining improved understanding of the pa- 
tient and procedural characteristics that affect cardiac surgery outcomes. 
1056 Richard P. Lippmann, Linda Kukolich, David Shahian 
INPUT 
FEATURES 
SELECT 
FEATURES 
AND 
REPLACE 
MISSING 
FEATURES 
CLASSIFY 
CONFIDENCE 
NETWORK 
RISK 
PROBABILITY 
Figure 1. Block diagram of a medical risk predictor. 
CONFIDENCE 
INTERVAL 
This paper describes a experiments that explore the use of neural networks to predict the 
risk of complications in coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. Previous approaches 
to risk prediction for bypass surgery used linear or logistic regression or a Bayesian ap- 
proach which assumes input features used for risk prediction are independent (e.g. Ed- 
wards, 1994; Marshall, 1994; Higgins, 1992; O'Conner, 1992). Neural networks have the 
potential advantages of modeling complex interactions among input features, of allowing 
both categorical and continuous input features, and of allowing more flexibility in fitting 
the expected risk than a simple linear or logistic function. 
2 RISK PREDICTION AND FEATURE SELECTION 
A block diagram of the medical risk prediction system used in these experiments is shown 
in Figure 1. Input features from a patient's medical record are provided as 105 raw inputs, 
a smaller subset of these features is selected, missing features in this subset are replaced 
with their most likely values from training data, and a reduced input feature vector is fed to 
a classifier and to a confidence network. The classifier provides outputs that estimate the 
probability or risk of one type of complication. The confidence network provides upper and 
lower bounds on these risk estimates. Both logistic regression and multilayer sigmoid neu- 
ral network (MLP) classifiers were evaluated in this study. Logistic regression is the most 
common approach to risk prediction. It is structurally equivalent to a feed-forward network 
with linear inputs and one output unit with a sigmoidal nonlinearity. Weights and offsets are 
estimated using a maximum likelihood criterion and iterative batch training. The refer- 
ence logistic regression classifier used in these experiments was implemented with the S- 
Plus glm function (Mathsoft, 1993) which uses iteratively reweighted least squares for 
training and no extra regularization such as weight decay. Multilayer feed-forward neural 
networks with no hidden nodes (denoted single-layer MLPs) and with one hidden layer and 
from 1 to 10 hidden nodes were also evaluated as implemented using LNKnet pattern clas- 
siftcation software (Lippmann, 1993). An MLP committee classifier containing eight mem- 
bers trained using different initial random weights was also evaluated. 
All classifiers were evaluated using a data base of 1257 patients who underwent coronary 
artery bypass surgery from 1990 to 1994. Classifiers were used to predict mortality, post- 
operative strokes, and renal failure. Predictions were made after a patient's medical history 
was obtained (History), after pre-surgical tests had been performed (Post-test), immediately 
before the operation (Preop), and immediately after the operation (Postop). Bootstrap sam- 
pling (Efron, 1993) was used to assess risk prediction accuracy because there were so few 
Predicting the Risk of Complications in Coronary Artery B)ass Operations 1057 
patients with complications in this data base. The number of patients with complications 
was 33 or 2.6% for mortality, 25 or 2.0% for stroke, and 21 or 1.7% for renal failure. All 
experiments were performed using 50 bootstrap training sets where a risk prediction tech- 
nique is trained with a bootstrap training set and evaluated using left-out patterns. 
HISTORY 
Age 
COPD (Chronic Obs. Pul. Disease) 
POST-TEST 
Pulmonary Ventricular Congestion 
X-ray Cardiomegaly 
X-ray Pulmonary Edema 
PREOP 
NTG (Nitroglycerin) 
IABP (Intraaortic Balloon Pump) 
Urgency Status 
MI When 
POSTOP 
Blood Used (Packed Cells) 
Perfusion Time 
NComplications 
%Tme Hits 
NHigh 
27/674 4.0% 
7/126 5.6% 
8/71 11.3% 
6/105 5.7% 
6/21 26.6% 
21/447 4.7% 
11/115 6.6% 
10/127 7.9% 
7/64 10.9% 
12/113 10.6% 
9/184 4.9% 
Figure 2. Features selected to predict mortality. 
The initial set of 105 raw input features included binary (e.g. Male/Female), categorical 
(e.g. MI When: none, old, recent, evolving), and continuous valued features (e.g. Perfusion 
Time, Age). There were many missing and irrelevant features and all features were only 
weakly predictive. Small sets of features were selected for each complication using the fol- 
lowing procedures: (1) Select those 10 to 40 features experience and previous studies indi- 
cate are related to each complication, (2) Omit features if a univariate contingency table 
analysis shows the feature is not important, (3) Omit features that are missing for more than 
5% of patients, (4) Order features by number of true positives, (5) Omit features that are 
similar to other features keeping the most predictive, and (7) Add features incrementally as 
a patient's hospital interaction progresses. This resulted in sets of from 3 to 11 features for 
the three complications. Figure 2 shows the 11 features selected to predict mortality. The 
first column lists the features, the second column presents a fraction equal to the number of 
complications when the feature was high divided by the number of times this feature was 
high (A threshold was assigned for continuous and categorical features that provided 
good separation), and the last column is the second column expressed as a percentage. Clas- 
sifters were provided identical sets of input features for all experiments. Continuous inputs 
to all classifiers were normalized to have zero mean and unit variance, categorical inputs 
ranged from -(D-1)/2 to (D-l)/2 in steps of 1.0, where D is the number of categories, and 
binary inputs were -0.5 or 0.5. 
3 PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS 
Risk prediction was evaluated by plotting and computing the area under receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curves and also by using chi-square tests to determine how accurately 
classifiers could stratify subjects into three risk categories. Automated experiments were 
performed using bootstrap sampling to explore the effect of varying the training step size 
1058 Richard P. Lippmann, Linda Kukolich, David Shahian 
lOO 
80 
60 
40 
20 
o 
0 20 40 
60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 
% FALSE ALARMS (100 - Specificity) 
Figure 3. Fifty preoperative bootstrap ROCs predicting mortality using an MLP 
classifier with two hidden nodes and the average ROC (left), and average ROCS 
for mortality using history, preoperative, and postoperative features (right). 
from 0.005 to 0.1; of using squared-error, cross-entropy, and maximum likelihood cost 
functions; of varying the number of hidden nodes from 1 to 8; and of stopping training after 
from 5 to 40 epochs. ROC areas varied little as parameters were varied. Risk stratification, 
which measures how well classifier outputs approximate posterior probabilities, improved 
substantially with a cross-entropy cost function (instead of squared error), with a smaller 
stepsize (0.01 instead of 0.05 or 0.1) and with more training epochs (20 versus 5 or 10). An 
MLP classifier with two hidden nodes provided good overall performance across compli- 
cations and patient stages with a cross-entropy cost function, a stepsize of 0.01, momentum 
of 0.6, and stochastic gradient descent stopping after 20 epochs. A single-layer MLP pro- 
vided good performance with similar settings, but stopping after 5 epochs. These settings 
were used for all experiments. The left side of Figure 3 shows the 50 bootstrap ROCs cre- 
ated using these settings for a two-hidden-node MLP when predicting mortality with pre- 
operative features and the ROC created by averaging these curves. There is a large 
variability in these ROCs due to the small amount of training data. The ROC area varies 
from 67% to 85% ((---4.7) and the sensitivity with 20% false alarms varies from 30% to 
79%. S
