A Silicon Axon 
Bradley A. Minch, Paul Hasler, Chris Diorio, Carver Mead 
Physics of Computation Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Pasadena, CA 91125 
bminch, paul, chris, carver@pcmp.caltech.edu 
Abstract 
We present a silicon model of an axon which shows promise as a 
building block for pulse-based neural computations involving cor- 
relations of pulses across both space and time. The circuit shares 
a number of features with its biological counterpart including an 
excitation threshold, a brief refractory period after pulse comple- 
tion, pulse amplitude restoration, and pulse width restoration. We 
provide a simple explanation of circuit operation and present data 
from a chip fabricated in a standard 2/rn CMOS process through 
the MOS Implementation Service (MOSIS). We emphasize the ne- 
cessity of the restoration of the width of the pulse in time for stable 
propagation in axons. 
I INTRODUCTION 
It is well known that axons are neural processes specialized for transmitting infor- 
mation over relatively long distances in the nervous system. Impulsive electrical 
disturbances known as action potentials are normally initiated near the cell body 
of a neuron when the voltage across the cell membrane crosses a threshold. These 
pulses are then propagated with a fairly stereotypical shape at a more or less con- 
stant velocity down the length of the axon. Consequently, axons excel at precisely 
preserving the relative timing of threshold crossing events but do not preserve any 
of the initial signal shape. Information, then, is presumably encoded in the relative 
timing of action potentials. 
740 Bradley A. Minch, Paul Hasler, Chris Diorio, Carver Mead 
The biophysical mechanisms underlying the initiation and propagation of action 
potentials in axons have been well studied since the seminal work of Hodgkin and 
Huxley on the giant axon of Loligo. (Hodgkin &; Huxley, 1952) Briefly, when the 
voltage across a small patch of the cell membrane increases to a certain level, a pop- 
ulation of ion channels permeable to sodium opens, allowing an influx of sodium 
ions, which, in turn, causes the membrane voltage to increase further and a pulse to 
be initiated. This population of channels rapidly inactivates, preventing the passage 
of additional ions. Another population of channels permeable to potassium opens 
after a brief delay causing an efflux of potassium ions, restoring the membrane to 
a more negative potential and terminating the pulse. This cycle of ion migration is 
coupled to neighboring sections of the axon, causing the action potential to prop- 
agate. The sodium channels remain inactivated for a brief interval of time during 
which the affected patch of membrane will not be able to support another action 
potential. This period of time is known as the refractory period. The axon circuit 
which we present in this paper does not attempt to model the detailed dynamics 
of the various populations of ion channels, although such detailed neuromimes are 
both possible (Lewis, 1968; Mahowald &; Douglas, 1991) and useful for learning 
about natural neural systems. Nonetheless, it shares a number of important fea- 
tures with its biological counterpart including having a threshold for excitation and 
a refractory period. 
It is well accepted that the amplitude of the action potential must be restored as 
it propagates. It is not as universally understood is that the width of the action 
potential must be restored in time if it is to propagate over any appreciable distance. 
Otherwise, the pulse would smear out in time resulting in a loss of precise timing 
information, or it would shrink down to nothing and cease to propagate altogether. 
In biological axons, restoration of the pulse width is accomplished through the 
dynamics of sodium channel inactivation and potassium channel activation. In our 
silicon model, the pulse width is restored through feedback from the successive 
stage. This feedback provides an inactivation which is similar to that of the sodium 
channels in biological axons and is also the underlying cause of refractoriness in our 
circuit. 
In the following section we provide a simple description of how the circuit be- 
haves. Following this, data from a chip fabricated in a standard 2/m CMOS process 
through MOSIS are presented and discussed. 
2 THE SILICON AXON CIRCUIT 
An axon circuit which is to be used as a building block in large-scale computational 
systems should be made as simple and low-power as possible, since it would be 
replicated many times in any such system. Each stage of the axon circuit described 
below consists of five transistors and two small capacitors, making the axon circuit 
very compact. The axon circuit uses the delay through a stage to time the signal 
which is fed back to restore the pulse width, thus avoiding the need for an additional 
delay circuit for each section. Additonally, the circuit operates with low power; 
during typical operation (a pulse of width 2ms travelling at 103stages/s), pulse 
propagation costs about 4p J/stage of energy. Under these circumstances, the circuit 
consumes about 2nW/stage of static power. 
A Silicon Axon 741 
In-q 
Ul 
+++ 
U2 
+++ 
V2 
U3 
-j- 
Figure 1: Three sections of the axon circuit. 
Three stages of the axon circuit are depicted in Figure 1. A single stage consists of 
two capacitors and what would be considered a pseudo-nMOS NAND gate and a 
pseudo-nMOS inverter in digital logic design. These simple circuits are character- 
ized by a threshold voltage for switching and a slew rate for recharging. Consider 
the inverter circuit. If the input is held low for a sufficiently long time, the pull-up 
transistor will have charged the output voltage almost completely to the positive 
rail. If the input voltage is ramped up toward the positive rail, the current in the 
pull-down transistor will increase rapidly. At some input voltage level, the current in 
the pull-down transistor will equal the saturation current of the pull-up transistor; 
this voltage is known as the threshold. The output voltage will begin to discharge 
at a rapidly increasing rate as the input voltage is increased further. After a very 
short time, the output will have discharged almost all the way to the negative rail. 
Now, if the input were decreased rapidly, the output voltage would ramp linearly 
in time (slew) up toward the positive rail at a rate set by the saturation current in 
the pull-up transistor and the capacitor on the output node. The NAND gate is 
similar except both inputs must be (roughly speaking) above the threshold in order 
for the output to go low. If either input goes low, the output will charge toward the 
positive rail. Note also that if one input of the NAND gate is held high, the circuit 
behaves exactly as an inverter. 
The axon circuit is formed by cascading multiple copies of this simple five transistor 
circuit in series. Let the voltage on the first capacitor of the n tn stage be denoted 
by u and the voltage on the second capacitor by v. Note that there is feedback 
from un+ to the lower input of the NAND gate of the n tn stage. Under quiescent 
conditions, the input to the first stage is low (at the negative rail), the u nodes of 
all stages are high (at the positive rail), and all of the v nodes are held low (at the 
negative rail). The feedback signal to the final stage in the line would be tied to 
the positive rail. The level of the bias voltages rl and r2 determine whether or not 
a narrow pulse fed into the input of the first stage will propagate and, if so, the 
width and velocity with which it does. 
In order to obtain a semi-quantitative understanding of how the axon circuit be- 
haves, we will first consider the dynamics of a cascade of simple inverters (three 
sections of which are depicted in Figure 2) and then consider the addition of feed- 
back. Under most circumstances, discharges will occur on a much faster time scale 
742 Bradley A. Minch, Paul Hasler, Chris Diorio, Carver Mead 
than the recharges, so we make the simplifying assumption that when the input 
of an inverter reaches the threshold voltage, the output discharges instantaneously. 
Additionally, we assume that saturated transistors behave as ideal current sources 
(i.e., we neglect the Early effect) so that the recharges are linear ramps in time. 
+++ 
-+-I- 
+++ +++ 
V2 
T _]_ 
V3 
Figure 2: A cascade of pseudo-nMOS inverters. 
Let It and I2 be the saturation currents in the pull-up transistors with bias voltages 
rt and r2, respectively. Let Ot and O2 be the threshold voltages of the first and 
second inverters in a single stage, respectively. Also, let/ = It/C and b = I2/C be 
the slew rates for the u and v nodes, respectively. Let A 1 -' )1//) and A2 = 
be the time required for un to charge from the negative rail up to 01 and for v,., to 
charge from the negative rail up to 02, respectively. Finally, let v, denote the peak 
value attained by the v signal of the n th stage. 
' 6n A2 
(a) It > I2 
(b) h < t2 
Figure 3: Geometry of the idealized u, and v, signals under the bias conditions (a) 
It > I2 and (b) It < 
Consider what would happen if vn-t exceeded Ot for a time 6.. In this case, u. 
would be held low for 6. and then released. Meanwhile, v. would ramp up to 
i6n. Then, un would begin to charge toward the positive rail while v. continues to 
charge. This continues for a time A2 at which point u. will have reached O2 causing 
A Silicon Axon 743 
v, to be discharged to the negative rail. Now, u,+t is held low while v, exceeds 
Otthis interval of time is precisely 6,+t. Figures 3a and 3b depict the geometry of 
the u, and v, signals in this scenario under the bias conditions I > 12 and It < 12, 
respectively. Simple Euclidean geometry implies that the evolution of 6, will be 
governed by the first-order difference equation 
which is trivially solved by 
5, = 5 + (n - 1)(A2 - A). 
Thus, the quantity A2-A de
