Extended ICA Removes Artifacts from 
Electroencephalographic Recordings 
Tzyy-Ping Jung , Colin Humphries , Te-Won Lee , Scott Makeig 2'3, 
Martin J. McKeown , Vicente Iragui 3, Terrence J. Sejnowski  
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Computational Neurobiology Lab 
The Salk Institute, P.O. Box 85800, San Diego, CA 92186-5800 
 j uag, colin, t ewon, SCOtt ,martin, t errysalk. edu 
2Naval Health Research Center, P.O. Box 85122, San Diego, CA 92186-5122 
SDepartment of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 
Abstract 
Severe contamination of electroencephalographic (EEG) activity 
by eye movements, blinks, muscle, heart and line noise is a serious 
problem for EEG interpretation and analysis. Rejecting contami- 
nated EEG segments results in a considerable loss of information 
and may be impractical for clinical data. Many methods have been 
proposed to remove eye movement and blink artifacts from EEG 
recordings. Often regression in the time or frequency domain is 
performed on simultaneous EEG and electrooculographic (EOG) 
recordings to derive parameters characterizing the appearance and 
spread of EOG artifacts in the EEG channels. However, EOG 
records also contain brain signals [1, 2], so regressing out EOG ac- 
tivity inevitably involves subtracting a portion of the relevant EEG 
signal from each recording as well. Regression cannot be used to 
remove muscle noise or line noise, since these have no reference 
channels. Here, we propose a new and generally applicable method 
for removing a wide variety of artifacts from EEG records. The 
method is based on an extended version of a previous Indepen- 
dent Component Analysis (ICA) algorithm [3, 4] for performing 
blind source separation on linear mixtures of independent source 
signals with either sub-Gaussian or super-Gaussian distributions. 
Our results show that ICA can effectively detect, separate and re- 
move activity in EEG records from a wide variety of artifactual 
sources, with results comparing favorably to those obtained using 
regression-based methods. 
Extended ICA Removes Artifacts from EEG Recordings 895 
1 Introduction 
Eye movements, muscle noise, heart signals, and line noise often produce large and 
distracting artifacts in EEG recordings. Rejecting EEG segments with artifacts 
larger than an arbitrarily preset value is the most commonly used method for elim- 
inating artifacts. However, when limited data are available, or blinks and muscle 
movements occur too frequently, as in some patient groups, the amount of data 
lost to artifact rejection may be unacceptable. Methods are needed for removing 
artifacts while preserving the essential EEG signals. 
Berg & Scherg [5] have proposed a spatio-temporal dipole model for eye-artifact re- 
moval that requires a priori assumptions about the number of dipoles for saccade, 
blink, and other eye-movements, and assumes they have a simple dipolaf structure. 
Several other proposed methods for removing eye-movement artifacts are based on 
regression in the time domain [6, 7] or frequency domain [8, 9]. However, simple 
time-domain regression tends to overcompensate for blink artifacts and may intro- 
duce new artifacts into EEG records [10]. The cause of this overcompensation is 
the difference between the spatial EOG-to-EEG transfer functions for blinks and 
saccades. Saccade artifacts arise from changes in orientation of the retinocorneal 
dipole, while blink artifacts arise from alterations in ocular conductance produced 
by contact of the eyelid with the cornea [11]. The transfer of blink artifacts to 
the recording electrodes decreases rapidly with distance from the eyes, while the 
transfer of saccade artifacts decreases more slowly, so that at the vertex the effect 
of saccades on the EEG is about double that of blinks [11], while at frontal sites 
the two effects may be near-equal. 
Regression in the frequency domain [8, 9] can account for frequency-dependent 
spatial transfer function differences from EOG to EEG, but is acausal and thus 
unsuitable for real-time applications. Both time and frequency domain regression 
methods depend on having a good regressor (e.g., an EOG), and share an inherent 
weakness that spread of excitation from eye movements and EEG signals is bidirec- 
tional. This means that whenever regression-based artifact removal is performed, a 
portion of relevant EEG signals also contained in the EOG data will be cancelled out 
along with the eye movement artifacts. Further, since the spatial transfer functions 
for various EEG phenomena present in the EOG differ from the regression transfer 
function, their spatial distributions after artifact removal may differ from the raw 
record. Similar problems complicate removal of other types of EEG artifacts. Rel- 
atively little work has been done on removing muscle activity, cardiac signals and 
electrode noise from EEG data. Regressing out muscle noise is impractical since 
regressing out signals from multiple muscle groups require multiple reference chan- 
nels. Line noise is most commonly filtered out in the frequency domain. However, 
current interest in EEG in the 40-80 Hz gamma band phenomena may make this 
approach undesirable as well. 
We present here a new and generally applicable method for isolating and removing 
a wide variety of EEG artifacts by linear decomposition using a new Independent 
Component Analysis (ICA) algorithm [4] related to a previous algorithm [3, 12]. 
The ICA method is based on spatial filtering and does not rely on having a 
cleanreference channel. It effectively decomposes multiple-channel EEG data 
into spatially-fixed and temporally independent components. Clean EEG signals 
can then be derived by eliminating the contributions of artifactual sources, since 
their time courses are generally temporally independent from and differently dis- 
tributed than sources of EEG activity. 
896 T-P Jung, C. Humphries, T-W. Lee, S. Makeig, M. J. McKeown, V. Iragui and T. J. Sejnowski 
Independent Component Analysis 
Bell and Sejnowski [3] have proposed a simple neural network algorithm that blindly 
separates mixtures, x, of independent sources, s, using infomax. They show that 
maximizing the joint entropy, H(y), of the output of a neural processor minimizes 
the mutual information among the output components, Yi = g(ui), where g(ui) is 
an invertible bounded nonlinearity and u = Wx. This implies that the distribution 
of the output yi approximates a uniform density. Independence is achieved through 
the nonlinear squashing function which provides necessary higher-order statistics 
through its Taylor series expansion. The learning rule can be derived by maximizing 
output joint entropy, H(y), with respect to W [3], giving, 
0H(Y) wTw ---- [I + pu T] W (1) 
AYV x 0W  
where i6i -- (O/Oui)ln(Oyi/Oui). The 'natural gradient' WTW term [13] avoids 
matrix inversions and speeds convergence. The form of the nonlinearity g(u) plays 
an essential role in the success of the algorithm. The ideal form for g() is the cu- 
mulative density function (cdf) of the distributions of the independent sources. In 
practice, if we choose g() to be a sigmoid function (as in [3]), the algorithm is then 
limited to separating sources with super-Gaussian distributions. An elegant way of 
generalizing the learning rule to sources with either sub- or super-Gaussian distri- 
butions is to approximate the estimated probability density function (pdf) in the 
form of a 4th-order Edgeworth approximation as derived by Girolami and Fyfe [14]. 
For sub-Gaussians, the following approximation is possible: 
For super-Gaussians, the same approximation becomes/5i = - tanh(ui) - ui. The 
sign can be chosen for each component using its normalized kurtosis, k4(ui), giving, 
AW x 0H(Y)wTw = [I - sign(k4)tanh(u)u T - uu T] W (2) 
ow 
Intuitively, for super-Gaussians the -tanh(u)u T term is an anti-Hebbian rule that 
tends to minimize the variance of u, whereas for sub-Gaussians the corresponding 
term is a Hebbian rule that tends to maximize its variance. 
2.1 Applying ICA to artifact correction 
The ICA algorithm is effective in performing source separation in domains where, 
(1) the mixing medium is linear and propagation delays are negligible, (2) the time 
courses of the sources are independent, and (3) the number of sources is the same 
as the number of sensors, meaning if we employ N sensors the ICA algorithm can 
separate N sources [3, 4, 12]. In the case of EEG signals [12], volume conduc- 
tion is thought to be linear and instantaneous, hence assumption (1) is satisfied. 
Assumption (2) is also reasonable because the sources of eye and muscle activity, 
line noise, and cardiac signals are not generally time locked to the sources of EEG 
activity which is thought to reflect activity of cortical neurons. Assumption (3) is 
questionable since we do not know the effective number of statistically-independent 
signals contributing to the scalp EEG. However, numerical simulations have con- 
firmed that the ICA algorithm can accurately identify the time courses of activation 
and the scalp topographies of relatively large and temporally-independent sources 
from simulated scalp recordings, even in the presence of a large number of low-level 
and temporally-independent source activities [16]. 
For EEG analysis, the rows of the input matrix x are the EEG signals recorded at 
different electrodes, the rows of the output data matrix u -- Wx are time courses of 
activation of the ICA components, and the columns of the inverse matrix, W-, give 
the projection strengths of the respective components onto the scalp sensors. The 
Extended ICA Removes Artifacts from EEG Recordings 897 
scalp topographies of the components provide evidence for their biological origin 
(e.g., eye activity should project mainly to frontal sites). In general, and unlike 
PCA, the component time courses of activation will be nonorthog
