451 
THEORY OF SELF-ORGANIZATION OF 
CORTICAL MAPS 
Shigeru Tanaka 
Fundamental Research Laboratorys, NEC Corporation 
1-1 Miyazaki 4-Chome, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 213, Japan 
ABSTRACT 
We have mathematically shown that cortical maps in the 
primary sensory cortices can be reproduced by using three 
hypotheses which have physiological basis and meaning. 
Here, our main focus is on ocular.dominance column formation 
in the primary visual cortex. Monte Carlo simulations on the 
segregation of ipsilateral and contralateral afferent terminals 
are carried out. Based on these, we show that almost all the 
physiological experimental results concerning the ocular 
dominance patterns of cats and monkeys reared under normal 
or various abnormal visual conditions can be explained from a 
viewpoint of the phase transition phenomena. 
ROUGH SKETCH OF OUR THEORY 
In order to describe the use-dependent self-organization of neural connections 
{Singer, 1987 and Frank, 1987}, we have proposed a set of coupled equations 
involving the electrical activities and neural connection density {Tanaka, 
1988}, by using the following physiologically based hypotheses: (1) Modifiable 
synapses grow or collapse due to the competition among themselves for some 
trophic factors, which are secreted retrogradely from the postsynaptic side to 
the presynaptic side. (2) Synapses also sprout or retract according to the 
concurrence of presynaptic spike activity and postsynaptic local membrane 
depolarization. (3) There already exist lateral connections within the layer, 
into which the modifiable nerve fibers are destined to project, before the 
synaptic modification begins. Considering this set of equations, we find that 
the time scale of electrical activities is much smaller than time course 
necessary for synapses to grow or retract. So we can apply the adiabatic 
approximation to the equations. Furthermore, we identify the input electrical 
activities, i.e., the firing frequency elicited from neurons in the projecting 
neuronal layer, with the stochastic process which is specialized by the spatial 
correlation function Cl;lc '. Here, k and k' represent the positions of the 
neurons in the projecting layer. p stands for different pathways such as 
ipsilateral or contralateral, on-center or off-center, colour specific or 
nonspecific and so on. From these approximations, we have a nonlinear 
452 Tanaka 
stochastic differential equation for the connection density, which describes a 
survival process of synapses within a small region, due to the strong 
competition. Therefore, we can look upon an equilibrium solution of this 
equation as a set of the Potts spin variables ojk's {Wu, 1982}. Here, if the 
neuron k in the projecting layer sends the axon to the position j in the target 
layer, ojk= 1 and if not, Ojl=0. The Potts spin variable has the following 
property: 
_ ojkp= 1 
If we limit the discussion within such equilibrium solutions, the problem is 
reduced to the thermodynamics in the spin system. The details of the 
mathematics are not argued here because they are beyond the scope of this 
paper {Tanaka}. We find that equilibrium behavior of the modifiable nerve 
terminals can be described in terms of thermodynamics in the system in 
which Hamiltonian H and fictitious temperature T are given by 
H =-q r%ov- , 
jkp jkp j'k'p' 
c 
- , (2) 
'I; 
$ 
where k and Ckp ;k' ' are the averaged firing frequency and the correlation 
function, respectively. Vjj. describes interaction between synapses in the 
target layer. q is the ratio of the total averaged membrane potential to the 
averaged membrane potential induced through the modifiable synapses from 
the projecting layer. c and us are the correlation time of the electrical 
activities and the time course necessary for synapses to grow or collapse. 
APPLICATION TO THE OCULAR DOMINANCE 
COLUMN FORMATION 
A specific cortical map structure is determined by the choice of the correlation 
function and the synaptic interaction function. Now, let us neglect k 
dependence of the correlation function and take into account only ipsilateral 
and contralateral pathways denoted by p, for mathematical simplicity. In this 
case, we can reduce the Potts spin variable into the Ising spin one through the 
following transformation: 
Theory of Self-Organization of Cortical Maps 453 
Sj =  p oil p 
kp 
where j is the position in the layer 4 of the primary visual cortex, and sj takes 
only 4-1 or -1, according to the ipsilateral or contralateral dominance. We 
find that this system can be described by HamiltonJan: 
H= -hZS j J 
- y 
J J j'j 
(3) 
The first term of eq.(3) reflects the ocular dominance shift, while the second 
term is essential to the ocular dominance stripe segregation. 
Here, we adopt the following simplified funorion as Vii,: 
qex qinh 
---- ..... 0 (tex-djj,) --  0 (iaa-djj,) 
V j j, nt,2 , 
ex ninh 
(4) 
where djj, is the distance between j and j'. ex and Jkin h are determined by the 
extent of excitatory and inhibitory lateral connections, respectively. O is the 
step function. q,x and q,a are propotional to the membrane potentials 
induced by excitatory and inhibitory neurons {Tanaka}. It is not essential to 
the qualitative discussion whether the interaction function is given by the use 
of the step function, the Gaussian function, or others. 
Next, we define 9+ 1 and T-1 as the average firing frequencies of ipsilateral 
and contralateral retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), and [+1 v and [+ 1 s as their 
fluctuations which originate in the visually stimulated and the spontaneous 
firings of RGCs, respectively. These are used to calculate two new 
parameters, r and a: 
 = (5) 
)2 + ( s V (,v)2 + (s 
'%/ (V+i +1 )2 -1 -1 )2 ' 
rl+l --rl_ 1 
 = _ _ (6) 
rl +1 4. rl_ 
454 Tanaka 
r is related to the correlation of firings elicited from the left and right RGCs. 
If there are only spontaneous firings, there is no correlation between the left 
and right RGCs' firings. On the other hand, in the presence of visual 
stimulation, they will correlate, since the two eyes receive almost the same 
images in normal animals. a is a function of the imbalance of firings of the left 
and right RGCs. Now, J and h in eq.(3) can be expressed in terms ofr and a: 
l_a2 ) 
J =b 1 1 -r --- 
1 +a 2 ' 
(?) 
where bl is a constant of the order of 1, and b2 is determined by average 
membrane potentials. 
Using the above equations, it will now be shown that patterns such as the 
ones observed for the ocular dominance column of new-world monkeys and 
cats can be explained. The patterns are very much dependent on three 
parameters r, a and K which is the ratio of the membrane potentials (qinh/qex) 
induced by the inhibitory and excitatory neurons. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
In the subsequent analysis by Monte Carlo simulations, we fix the values of 
parameters: qex-l.0, hex=0.25, hinh=l.0, T=0.25, b=l.0, b2=0.1, and 
dx = 0.1. dx is the diameter of a small area which is occupied by one spin. In 
the computer simulations of Fig. l, we can see that the stripe patterns become 
more segregated as the correlation strength r decreases. The similarity of the 
pattern in Fig. lc to the well-known experimental evidence {Hubel and Wiesel, 
1977} is striking. Furthermore, it is known that if the animal has been reared 
under the condition where the two optic nerves are electrically stimulated 
synchronously, stripes in the primary visual cortex are not formed {Stryker}. 
This condition corresponds to r values close to 1 and again our theory predicts 
these experimental results as can be seen in Fig. la. On the contrary, if the 
strabismic animal has been reared under the normal condition {Wiesel and 
Hubel, 1974}, r is effectively smaller than that of a normal animal. So we 
expect that the ocular dominance stripe has very sharp delimitations as it is 
observed experimentally. In the case of a binocularly deprived animal {Wiesel 
and Hubel, 1974},i.e., +v=_v=0, it is reasonable to expect that the 
situation is similar to the strabismic animal. 
Theory of Self-Organization of Cortical Maps 455 
Figure 1. Ocular dominance patterns given by the computer 
simulations in the case of the large inhibitory connections 
(K=I.0) and the balanced activities (a-0). The correlation 
strength r is given in each case: r=0.9 for (a), r=0.6 for (b), 
and r = 0.1 for (c). 
In the case of a 0, we can get asymmetric stripe patterns such as one in 
Fig.2a. Since this situation corresponds to the condition of the monocular 
deprivation, we can also explain the experimental observation {Hubel et 
a1.,1977} successfully. There are other patterns seen in Fig.2b, which we call 
blob lattice patterns. The existence of such patterns has not been confirmed 
physiologically, as far as we know. However, this theory on the ocular 
dominance column formation predicts that the blob lattice patterns will be 
found if appropriate conditions, such as the period of the monocular 
Figure 2. Ocular dominance patterns given by the computer 
simulations in the case of the large inhibitory connections 
(K=I.0) and the imbalanced activities: a=0.2 for (a) and 
a-= 0.4 for (b). The correlation strength r is given by r= 0.1 for 
both (a) and (b). 
456 Tanaka 
deprivation, are chosen. 
We find that the straightness of the stripe pattern is controlled by the 
parameter K. Namely, if K is large, i.e. inhibitory connections are more 
effective than excitatory ones, the pattern is straight. However if  is small 
the pattern has many branches and ends. This is illustrated in Fig. 3c. We 
can get a pattern similar to the ocular dominance pattern of normal cats 
{Anderson et al., 1988}, if is small and r-rc (Fig. 3b). The meaning of rc will 
be discussed in the following paragraphs. We further get a labyrinth pattern 
by means of r smaller than rc and the same . We can think  value is specific 
to the animal under consideration because of its definiti
