Neural Network Application to Diagnostics and 
Control of Vehicle Control Systems 
Kenneth A. Marko 
Research Staff 
Ford Motor Company 
Dearborn, Michigan 48121 
ABSTRACT 
Diagnosis of faults in complex, real-time control systems is a 
complicated task that has resisted solution by traditional methods. We 
have shox that neural networks can be successfully employed to 
diagnose faults in digitally controlled powertrain systems. This paper 
discusses the means we use to develop the appropriate databases for 
training and testing in order to select the optimum network architectures 
and to provide reasonable estimates of the classification accuracy of 
these networks on new samples of dam. Recent work applying neural 
nets to adaptive control of an active suspension system is presented. 
1 INTRODUCTION 
This paper reports on work performed on the application of artificial neural systems 
(ANS) techniques to the diagnosis and control of vehicle systems. Specifically, we have 
examined the diagnosis of common faults in powertrain systems and investigated the 
problem of developing an adaptive controller for an active suspension system. 
In our diagnostic investigations we utilize neural networks routinely to establish the 
standards for diagnostic accuracy we can expect from analysis of vehicle data. Previously 
we have examined the use of various ANS paradigms to diagnosis of a wide range of 
faults in a carefully collected data set from a vehicle operated in a narrow range of speed 
and load. Subsequently, we have explored the classification of a data set with a more 
restricted set of faults, drawn from a much broader range of operating conditions. This 
step was taken as concern about needs for specific, real-time continuous diagnostics 
superseded the need to develop well-controlled, on-demand diagnostic testing. The 
537 
538 Marko 
impetus arises from recently enacted legislation which dictates that such real-time 
diagnosis of powertrain systems will be required on cars sold in the U.S. by the 
mid-1990's. The difference between the two applications is simple: in the former studies 
it was presumed that an independent agent has identified that a fault is present, the root 
cause needs only to be identified. In the real-time problem, the diagnostic task is to detect 
and identify the fault as soon as it occurs. Consequently, the real-time application is 
more demanding. In analyzing this more difficult task, we explore some of the 
complications that arise in developing successful classification schemes for the vi-aly 
semi-infinite data streams that are produced in continuous operation of a vehicle fleet. 
The obstacles to realized applications of neural nets in this area often stem from the 
sophistication required of the classifier and the complexity of the problems addressed. The 
limited computational resources on-board vehicles will determine the scope of the 
diagnostic task and how implementations, such as ,',tS methods, will operate. 
Finally, we briefly examine an extension of the ANS work to developing trainable 
controllers for non-linear dynamic systems such as active suspension systems. 
Preliminary work in this area indicates that effective controllers for non-linear plants can 
be developed efficiently, despite the exclusion of an accurate plant model from the training 
process. Although our studies were carried out in simulation, and accurate plant models 
were therefore available, the capability to develop controllers in the absence of such 
models is a significant step forward. Such controllers can be developed for existing, un- 
modeled hardware, and thereby reduce both the efforts required to develop control 
algorithms by conventional means and the time to program the real-time controllers. 
2 NEURAL NET DIAGNOSTICS OF CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Our interest in neural networks for diagnosis of faults in control systems stemmed from 
work on model-based diagnosis of faults in such systems, typically called plants. In the 
model-based approach, a model of the system under control is developed and used to 
predict the dynamic behavior of the system. With the system in operation, the plant 
performance is observed. The expected behavior and the observed behavior are compared, 
and if no differences are found, the plant is deemed to be operating normally. If deviations 
are found, the differences indicate that a fault of some sort is present (failure detection), 
and an analysis of the differences is used in an attempt to identify the cause (fault 
identification). Successful implementations (Min, 1987; Liubakka eta/, 1988; Rizzoni 
et al, 1989) of fault detection and identification in complex systems linearized about 
selected operating points were put together utilizing mathematical constructs called failure 
detection filters. These filters are simply matrices which transform a set of observations 
(which become an input vector to the filter) of a plant into another vector space (the 
output vector or classification space). The form of these filters suggested to us that 
neural networks could be used to learn similar transforms and thereby avoid the tedious 
process of model development and validation and a priori identification of the detection 
filter matrix elements. We shov,'ed previously that complex signal patterns from 
operating internal combustion engines could be examined on a cycle by cycle basis (two 
revolutions of the common four-stroke engine cycle) and used to correctly identify faults 
present in the engine (Marko et al, 1989). 
Typical data collected from an operating engine has been shown elsewhere (Marko et al, 
1989). This demonstration was focussed on a production engine, limited to a small 
Neural Network Application to Diagnostics 539 
operating range. One might suppose that a linear model-based diagnostic system could 
be constructed for such a task, if one wished to expend the time and effort, and therefore 
this exercise was not a strenuous test of the neural network approach. Additionally, our 
expert diagnostician could examine the data traces and accurately identify the faults. 
However, we demonstrated that this problem, which had eluded automated solution by 
other means up to that time, could easily be handled by neural network classifiers and 
encouraged us to proceed to more difficult problems for which efficient, rigorous 
procedures did not exist. We were prepared to tolerate developing empirical solutions to 
our more difficult problems, since we did not expect that a thorough analytic 
understanding would precede a demonstrated solution. The process outlined here utilized 
neural network analysis almost exclusively (predominantly back-propagation) on these 
problems. The understanding of the relationship of neural networks, the structure of the 
data and the training and testing of the classifiers emerged after acceptable solutions using 
the neural networks methods were obtained. 
Consequently, the next problem addressed was that of identifying similar faults by 
observing the system through the multiplex serial communication link resident on the 
engine control computer. The serial link provides a simple hook-up procedure to the 
vehicle without severing any links between plant and microcontroller. However, the chief 
drawback of this approach is that it greatly complicates the recognition task. The 
complication arises because the data from the plant is sampled too infrequently, is 
contaminated by some processing in the controller, and delivered asynchronously to the 
serial link with respect to events in the plant (the data output process is not permitted to 
interrupt the real-time control requirements). In this case, a test sample of a smaller 
number of faults was drawn from a vehicle operated in a similar limited range to the fin'st 
example and an attempt to detect and identify the faults was made using a variety of 
networks. Unlike the previous case, it was impossible for any experienced technicians to 
identify the faults. Again, neural network classifiers were found to develop satisfactory 
solutions over these limited data sets, which were later verified by a number of careful 
statistical tests (Marko et al, 1990). This more complex problem also produced a wider 
range of performance among the various neural net paradigms studied, as shown in Figure 
1, where the error rates for various classifiers on these data sets are shown in the graph. 
These results suggested that not only would data quality and quantity need to be controlled 
and improved, but that the problem itself would implicitly direct us to the choice of the 
classifier paradigm. These issues are more thoroughly discussed elsewhere (Marko et al, 
1990; Weiss et al, 1990), but the conclusion was that a complete, acceptable solution to 
the real scope of this problem could not be developed with our group's resources for data 
collection, data verification and classifier validation. 
With these two experiences in mind, we could see that the first approach was an effective 
means of handling the failure detection and identification (FDI) problem, while the latter, 
although attractive from the standpoint of easy link-up to a vehicle, was for our 
numerical analysis, a very difficult task. It seemed that the appropriate course was to 
obtain reliable data, by observing the plant directly, and to perform the classification on 
that data. An effective scheme to accomplish this goal is to perform the classification task 
in the control microprocessor which has access to the direct data. Adopting this strategy, 
we move the diagnostics from an off-board processor to the on-board processor, and 
create a new set of possibilities for diagnostics. 
540 Marko 
With diagnostics contained in the controlling processor, diagnostics can be shifted from 
an on-demand activity, undertaken at predetermined intervals or when the vehicle operator 
has detected a problem, to a continuous, real-ti
